4.4 Softmax Regression Implementation from
Scratch
Because softmax regression is so fundamental, we believe that you ought to know how to
implement it yourself. Here, we limit ourselves to defining the softmax-specific aspects of
the model and reuse the other components from our linear regression section, including the
training loop.
import torch
from d2l import torch as d2l
4.4.1 The Softmax
Let’s begin with the most important part: the mapping from scalars to probabilities. For a
refresher, recall the operation of the sum operator along specific dimensions in a tensor, as
discussed in Section 2.3.6 and Section 2.3.7. Given a matrix X wecansumoverallelements
(by default) or only over elements in the same axis. The axis variable lets us compute row
and column sums:
X = torch.tensor([[1.0, 2.0, 3.0], [4.0, 5.0, 6.0]])
X.sum(0, keepdims=True), X.sum(1, keepdims=True)
(tensor([[5., 7., 9.]]),
tensor([[ 6.],
[15.]]))
Computing the softmax requires three steps: (i) exponentiation of each term; (ii) a sum
over each row to compute the normalization constant for each example; (iii) division of
each row by its normalization constant, ensuring that the result sums to 1:
softmax(X)𝑖𝑗 = exp(X𝑖𝑗)
𝑘 exp(X𝑖𝑘) .
96
(4.4.1)
The (logarithm of the) denominator is called the (log) partition function. It was introduced
in statistical physics96 to sum over all possible states in a thermodynamic ensemble. The
implementation is straightforward:
def softmax(X):
X_exp = torch.exp(X)
partition = X_exp.sum(1, keepdims=True)
return X_exp / partition # The broadcasting mechanism is applied here
For any input X, we turn each element into a nonnegative number. Each row sums up to
1, as is required for a probability. Caution: the code above is not robust against very large
or very small arguments. While it is sufficient to illustrate what is happening, you should
141
Softmax Regression Implementation from Scratch
not use this code verbatim for any serious purpose. Deep learning frameworks have such
protections built in and we will be using the built-in softmax going forward.
X = torch.rand((2, 5))
X_prob = softmax(X)
X_prob, X_prob.sum(1)
(tensor([[0.2511, 0.1417, 0.1158, 0.2529, 0.2385],
[0.2004, 0.1419, 0.1957, 0.2504, 0.2117]]),
tensor([1., 1.]))
4.4.2 The Model
We now have everything that we need to implement the softmax regression model. As in
our linear regression example, each instance will be represented by a fixed-length vector.
Since the raw data here consists of 28 × 28 pixel images, we flatten each image, treating
them as vectors of length 784. In later chapters, we will introduce convolutional neural
networks, which exploit the spatial structure in a more satisfying way.
In softmax regression, the number of outputs from our network should be equal to the
number of classes. Since our dataset has 10 classes, our network has an output dimension
of 10. Consequently, our weights constitute a 784 × 10 matrix plus a 1 × 10 row vector for
the biases. As with linear regression, we initialize the weights W with Gaussian noise. The
biases are initialized as zeros.
class SoftmaxRegressionScratch(d2l.Classifier):
def __init__(self, num_inputs, num_outputs, lr, sigma=0.01):
super().__init__()
self.save_hyperparameters()
self.W = torch.normal(0, sigma, size=(num_inputs, num_outputs),
requires_grad=True)
self.b = torch.zeros(num_outputs, requires_grad=True)
def parameters(self):
return [self.W, self.b]
The code below defines how the network maps each input to an output. Note that we flatten
each 28 × 28 pixel image in the batch into a vector using reshape before passing the data
through our model.
@d2l.add_to_class(SoftmaxRegressionScratch)
def forward(self, X):
X = X.reshape((-1, self.W.shape[0]))
return softmax(torch.matmul(X, self.W) + self.b)
4.4.3 The Cross-Entropy Loss
Next we need to implement the cross-entropy loss function (introduced in Section 4.1.2).
This may be the most common loss function in all of deep learning. At the moment, appli
142
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
cations of deep learning easily cast as classification problems far outnumber those better
treated as regression problems.
Recall that cross-entropy takes the negative log-likelihood of the predicted probability as
signed to the true label. For efficiency we avoid Python for-loops and use indexing instead.
In particular, the one-hot encoding in y allows us to select the matching terms in ˆy.
To see this in action we create sample data y_hat with 2examples of predicted probabilities
over 3 classes and their corresponding labels y. The correct labels are 0 and 2 respectively
(i.e., the first and third class). Using y as the indices of the probabilities in y_hat, we can
pick out terms efficiently.
y = torch.tensor([0, 2])
y_hat = torch.tensor([[0.1, 0.3, 0.6], [0.3, 0.2, 0.5]])
y_hat[[0, 1], y]
tensor([0.1000, 0.5000])
Nowwe can implement the cross-entropy loss function by averaging over the logarithms of
the selected probabilities.
def cross_entropy(y_hat, y):
return-torch.log(y_hat[list(range(len(y_hat))), y]).mean()
cross_entropy(y_hat, y)
tensor(1.4979)
@d2l.add_to_class(SoftmaxRegressionScratch)
def loss(self, y_hat, y):
return cross_entropy(y_hat, y)
4.4.4 Training
We reuse the fit methoddefinedinSection3.4totrain the model with 10 epochs. Notethat
the number of epochs (max_epochs), the minibatch size (batch_size), and learning rate
(lr) are adjustable hyperparameters. That means that while these values are not learned
during our primary training loop, they still influence the performance of our model, both
vis-à-vis training and generalization performance. In practice you will want to choose these
values based on the validation split of the data and then, ultimately, to evaluate your final
modelon thetest split. AsdiscussedinSection3.6.3, wewillregardthetestdataofFashion
MNIST as the validation set, thus reporting validation loss and validation accuracy on this
split.
143
Softmax Regression Implementation from Scratch
data = d2l.FashionMNIST(batch_size=256)
model = SoftmaxRegressionScratch(num_inputs=784, num_outputs=10, lr=0.1)
trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10)
trainer.fit(model, data)
4.4.5 Prediction
Now that training is complete, our model is ready to classify some images.
X, y = next(iter(data.val_dataloader()))
preds = model(X).argmax(axis=1)
preds.shape
torch.Size([256])
We aremore interested in the images we label incorrectly. Wevisualize them bycomparing
their actual labels (first line of text output) with the predictions from the model (second line
of text output).
wrong = preds.type(y.dtype) != y
X, y, preds = X[wrong], y[wrong], preds[wrong]
labels = [a+'\n'+b for a, b in zip(
data.text_labels(y), data.text_labels(preds))]
data.visualize([X, y], labels=labels)
4.4.6 Summary
By now we are starting to get some experience with solving linear regression and classifi
cation problems. With it, we have reached what would arguably be the state of the art of
144
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
97
1960–1970s of statistical modeling. In the next section, we will show you how to leverage
deep learning frameworks to implement this model much more efficiently.
4.4.7 Exercises
1. Inthissection, wedirectly implemented thesoftmaxfunctionbasedonthemathematical
definition of the softmaxoperation. AsdiscussedinSection4.1thiscancausenumerical
instabilities.
1. Test whether softmax still works correctly if an input has a value of 100.
2. Test whether softmax still works correctly if the largest of all inputs is smaller than
−100?
3. Implement a fix by looking at the value relative to the largest entry in the argument.
2. Implement a cross_entropy function that follows the definition of the cross-entropy
loss function 𝑖 𝑦𝑖 log ˆ𝑦𝑖.
1. Try it out in the code example of this section.
2. Whydoyou think it runs more slowly?
3. Should you use it? When would it make sense to?
4. What do you need to be careful of? Hint: consider the domain of the logarithm.
3. Is it always a good idea to return the most likely label? For example, would you do this
for medical diagnosis? How would you try to address this?
4. Assume that we want to use softmax regression to predict the next word based on some
features. What are some problems that might arise from a large vocabulary?
5. Experiment with the hyperparameters of the code in this section. In particular:
1. Plot how the validation loss changes as you change the learning rate.
2. Do the validation and training loss change as you change the minibatch size? How
large or small do you need to go before you see an effect?
Discussions97.
4.5 Concise Implementation of Softmax Regression
Just as high-level deep learning frameworks made it easier to implement linear regression
(see Section 3.5), they are similarly convenient here.
145
Concise Implementation of Softmax Regression
import torch
from torch import nn
from torch.nn import functional as F
from d2l import torch as d2l
4.5.1 Defining the Model
As in Section 3.5, we construct our fully connected layer using the built-in layer. The built
in __call__methodtheninvokesforwardwheneverweneedtoapplythenetworktosome
input.
We use a Flatten layer to convert the fourth-order tensor X to second order by keeping the
dimensionality along the first axis unchanged.
class SoftmaxRegression(d2l.Classifier): #@save
"""The softmax regression model."""
def __init__(self, num_outputs, lr):
super().__init__()
self.save_hyperparameters()
self.net = nn.Sequential(nn.Flatten(),
nn.LazyLinear(num_outputs))
def forward(self, X):
return self.net(X)
4.5.2 Softmax Revisited
In Section 4.4 we calculated our model’s output and applied the cross-entropy loss. While
this is perfectly reasonable mathematically, it is risky computationally, because of numer
ical underflow and overflow in the exponentiation.
Recall that the softmax function computes probabilities via ˆ𝑦𝑗 = exp(𝑜𝑗)
𝑘 exp(𝑜𝑘) . If some of the
𝑜𝑘 are very large, i.e., very positive, then exp(𝑜𝑘) might be larger than the largest number
we can have for certain data types. This is called overflow. Likewise, if every argument is
a very large negative number, we will get underflow. For instance, single precision floating
point numbers approximately cover the range of 10−38 to 1038. As such, if the largest term
in o lies outside the interval [−90,90], the result will not be stable. A way round this
problem is to subtract ¯𝑜 def
= max𝑘 𝑜𝑘 from all entries:
ˆ
𝑦𝑗 = exp𝑜𝑗
𝑘 exp 𝑜𝑘 
= exp(𝑜𝑗 − ¯𝑜)exp ¯𝑜
𝑘 exp(𝑜𝑘 − ¯𝑜) exp ¯𝑜 = exp(𝑜𝑗 − ¯𝑜)
𝑘 exp(𝑜𝑘 − ¯𝑜) .
(4.5.1)
By construction we know that 𝑜𝑗 − ¯𝑜 ≤ 0 for all 𝑗. As such, for a 𝑞-class classification
problem, the denominator is contained in the interval [1,𝑞]. Moreover, the numerator
never exceeds 1, thus preventing numerical overflow. Numerical underflow only occurs
when exp(𝑜𝑗 − ¯𝑜) numerically evaluates as 0. Nonetheless, a few steps down the road we
might find ourselves in trouble when we want to compute log ˆ𝑦𝑗 as log0. In particular, in
backpropagation, we might find ourselves faced with a screenful of the dreaded NaN (Not a
Number) results.
146
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
98
Fortunately, we are saved by the fact that even though we are computing exponential func
tions, we ultimately intend to take their log (when calculating the cross-entropy loss). By
combining softmax and cross-entropy, we can escape the numerical stability issues alto
gether. We have:
log ˆ𝑦𝑗 = log exp(𝑜𝑗 − ¯𝑜)
𝑘 exp(𝑜𝑘 − ¯𝑜) = 𝑜𝑗 − ¯𝑜 −log
𝑘 
exp(𝑜𝑘 − ¯𝑜).
(4.5.2)
This avoids both overflow and underflow. We will want to keep the conventional softmax
function handy in case we ever want to evaluate the output probabilities by our model. But
instead of passing softmax probabilities into our new loss function, we just pass the logits
andcompute thesoftmaxand its log all at once inside the cross-entropy lossfunction, which
does smart things like the “LogSumExp trick”98.
@d2l.add_to_class(d2l.Classifier) #@save
def loss(self, Y_hat, Y, averaged=True):
Y_hat = Y_hat.reshape((-1, Y_hat.shape[-1]))
Y = Y.reshape((-1,))
return F.cross_entropy(
Y_hat, Y, reduction='mean' if averaged else 'none')
4.5.3 Training
Next we train our model. We use Fashion-MNIST images, flattened to 784-dimensional
feature vectors.
data = d2l.FashionMNIST(batch_size=256)
model = SoftmaxRegression(num_outputs=10, lr=0.1)
trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10)
trainer.fit(model, data)
As before, this algorithm converges to a solution that is reasonably accurate, albeit this time
with fewer lines of code than before.
4.5.4 Summary
High-level APIs are very convenient at hiding from their user potentially dangerousaspects,
such as numerical stability. Moreover, they allow users to design models concisely with
147
Generalization in Classification
99
very few lines of code. This is both a blessing and a curse. The obvious benefit is that it
makes things highly accessible, even to engineers who never took a single class of statistics
in their life (in fact, they are part of the target audience of the book). But hiding the sharp
edges also comes with a price: a disincentive to add new and different components on your
own, since there is little muscle memory for doing it. Moreover, it makes it more difficult
to fix things whenever the protective padding of a framework fails to cover all the corner
cases entirely. Again, this is due to lack of familiarity.
As such, we strongly urge you to review both the bare bones and the elegant versions of
many of the implementations that follow. While we emphasize ease of understanding, the
implementations are nonetheless usually quite performant (convolutions are the big excep
tion here). It is our intention to allow you to build on these when you invent something new
that no framework can give you.
4.5.5 Exercises
1. Deep learning uses many different number formats, including FP64 double precision
(used extremely rarely), FP32 single precision, BFLOAT16 (good for compressed rep
resentations), FP16 (very unstable), TF32 (a new format from NVIDIA), and INT8.
Compute the smallest and largest argument of the exponential function for which the
result does not lead to numerical underflow or overflow.
2. INT8is a very limited format consisting of nonzero numbers from 1 to 255. How could
you extend its dynamic range without using more bits? Do standard multiplication and
addition still work?
3. Increase the number of epochs for training. Why might the validation accuracy decrease
after a while? How could we fix this?
4. What happens as you increase the learning rate? Compare the loss curves for several
learning rates. Which one works better? When?
Discussions99.
4.6 Generalization in Classification
So far, we have focused on how to tackle multiclass classification problems by training
(linear) neural networks with multiple outputs and softmax functions. Interpreting our
model’s outputs as probabilistic predictions, we motivated and derived the cross-entropy
loss function, which calculates the negative log likelihood that our model (for a fixed set
of parameters) assigns to the actual labels. And finally, we put these tools into practice
by fitting our model to the training set. However, as always, our goal is to learn general
patterns, as assessed empirically on previously unseen data (the test set). High accuracy
on the training set means nothing. Whenever each of our inputs is unique (and indeed this
is true for most high-dimensional datasets), we can attain perfect accuracy on the training
148
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
set by just memorizing the dataset on the first training epoch, and subsequently looking up
the label whenever we see a new image. And yet, memorizing the exact labels associated
with the exact training examples does not tell us how to classify new examples. Absent
further guidance, we might have to fall back on random guessing whenever we encounter
new examples.
A number of burning questions demand immediate attention:
1. How many test examples do we need to give a good estimate of the accuracy of our
classifiers on the underlying population?
2. What happens if we keep evaluating models on the same test repeatedly?
3. Why should we expect that fitting our linear models to the training set should fare any
better than our naive memorization scheme?
Whereas Section 3.6 introduced the basics of overfitting and generalization in the context of
linear regression, this chapter will go a little deeper, introducing some of the foundational
ideas of statistical learning theory. It turns out that we often can guarantee generalization
a priori: for many models, and for any desired upper bound on the generalization gap 𝜖,
we can often determine some required number of samples 𝑛 such that if our training set
contains at least 𝑛 samples, our empirical error will lie within 𝜖 of the true error, for any
data generating distribution. Unfortunately, it also turns out that while these sorts of guar
antees provide a profound set of intellectual building blocks, they are of limited practical
utility to the deep learning practitioner. In short, these guarantees suggest that ensuring
generalization of deep neural networks a priori requires an absurd number of examples
(perhaps trillions or more), even when we find that, on the tasks we care about, deep neural
networks typically generalize remarkably well with far fewer examples (thousands). Thus
deep learning practitioners often forgo a priori guarantees altogether, instead employing
methods that have generalized well on similar problems in the past, and certifying gen
eralization post hoc through empirical evaluations. When we get to Chapter 5, we will
revisit generalization and provide a light introduction to the vast scientific literature that
has sprung in attempts to explain why deep neural networks generalize in practice.
4.6.1 The Test Set
Since we have already begun to rely on test sets as the gold standard method for assessing
generalization error, let’s get started by discussing the properties of such error estimates.
Let’s focus on a fixed classifier 𝑓, without worrying about how it was obtained. Moreover
suppose that we possess a fresh dataset of examples D = (x(𝑖), 𝑦(𝑖)) 𝑛
𝑖=1 that were not used
to train the classifier 𝑓 . The empirical error of our classifier 𝑓 on D is simply the fraction
of instances for which the prediction 𝑓 (x(𝑖)) disagrees with the true label 𝑦(𝑖), and is given
by the following expression:
𝜖D( 𝑓) = 1
𝑛 
�
�
𝑖=1 
1( 𝑓 (x(𝑖)) ≠ 𝑦(𝑖)).
(4.6.1)
By contrast, thepopulationerror istheexpected fractionofexamplesintheunderlyingpop
ulation (some distribution 𝑃(𝑋,𝑌) characterized by probability density function 𝑝(x, 𝑦))
149
Generalization in Classification
for which our classifier disagrees with the true label:
𝜖( 𝑓) = 𝐸(x,𝑦)∼𝑃1( 𝑓 (x) ≠ 𝑦) =
1( 𝑓 (x) ≠ 𝑦)𝑝(x, 𝑦) 𝑑x𝑑𝑦.
(4.6.2)
While 𝜖( 𝑓) is the quantity that we actually care about, we cannot observe it directly, just
as we cannot directly observe the average height in a large population without measuring
every single person. We can only estimate this quantity based on samples. Because our
test set D is statistically representative of the underlying population, we can view 𝜖D( 𝑓)
as a statistical estimator of the population error 𝜖( 𝑓). Moreover, because our quantity of
interest 𝜖( 𝑓 ) is an expectation (of therandomvariable1( 𝑓 (𝑋) ≠ 𝑌))andthecorresponding
estimator 𝜖D( 𝑓) is the sample average, estimating the population error is simply the classic
problem of mean estimation, which you may recall from Section 2.6.
An important classical result from probability theory called the central limit theorem guar
antees that whenever we possess 𝑛 random samples 𝑎1,...,𝑎𝑛 drawn from any distribution
with mean 𝜇 and standard deviation 𝜎, then, as the number of samples 𝑛 approaches infin
ity, the sample average ˆ𝜇 approximately tends towards a normal distribution centered at the
true mean and with standard deviation 𝜎/√𝑛. Already, this tells us something important:
as the number of examples grows large, our test error 𝜖D( 𝑓) should approach the true error
𝜖( 𝑓) at a rate of O(1/√𝑛). Thus, to estimate our test error twice as precisely, we must
collect four times as large a test set. To reduce our test error by a factor of one hundred, we
must collect ten thousand times as large a test set. In general, such a rate of O(1/√𝑛) is
often the best we can hope for in statistics.
Now that we know something about the asymptotic rate at which our test error 𝜖D( 𝑓)
converges to the true error 𝜖( 𝑓), we can zoom in on some important details. Recall that
the random variable of interest 1( 𝑓 (𝑋) ≠ 𝑌) can only take values 0 and 1 and thus is
a Bernoulli random variable, characterized by a parameter indicating the probability that
it takes value 1. Here, 1 means that our classifier made an error, so the parameter of our
randomvariable is actually the true error rate 𝜖( 𝑓). The variance 𝜎2 of a Bernoulli depends
on its parameter (here, 𝜖( 𝑓)) according to the expression 𝜖( 𝑓)(1 − 𝜖( 𝑓)). While 𝜖( 𝑓) is
initially unknown, we know that it cannot be greater than 1. A little investigation of this
function reveals that our variance is highest when the true error rate is close to 0.5 and can
be far lower when it is close to 0 or close to 1. This tells us that the asymptotic standard
deviation of our estimate 𝜖D( 𝑓) of the error 𝜖( 𝑓) (over the choice of the 𝑛 test samples)
cannot be any greater than 0.25/𝑛.
If we ignore the fact that this rate characterizes behavior as the test set size approaches
infinity rather than when we possess finite samples, this tells us that if we want our test
error 𝜖D( 𝑓) to approximate the population error 𝜖( 𝑓) such that one standard deviation
corresponds to an interval of ±0.01, then we should collect roughly 2500 samples. If we
want to fit two standard deviations in that range and thus be 95% confident that 𝜖D( 𝑓) ∈
𝜖( 𝑓) ± 0.01, then we will need 10,000 samples!
This turns out to be the size of the test sets for many popular benchmarks in machine learn
ing. You might be surprised to find out that thousands of applied deep learning papers get
published every year making a big deal out of error rate improvements of 0.01 or less. Of
150
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
course, when the error rates are much closer to 0, then an improvement of 0.01 can indeed
be a big deal.
One pesky feature of our analysis thus far is that it really only tells us about asymptotics,
i.e., how the relationship between 𝜖D and 𝜖 evolves as our sample size goes to infinity.
Fortunately, because our random variable is bounded, we can obtain valid finite sample
bounds by applying an inequality due to Hoeffding (1963):
𝑃(𝜖D( 𝑓) −𝜖(𝑓) ≥ 𝑡) < exp −2𝑛𝑡2 .
(4.6.3)
Solving for the smallest dataset size that would allow us to conclude with 95% confidence
that the distance 𝑡 between our estimate 𝜖D( 𝑓) and the true error rate 𝜖( 𝑓) does not exceed
0.01, you will find that roughly 15,000 examples are required as compared to the 10,000
examples suggested by the asymptotic analysis above. If you go deeper into statistics you
will find that this trend holds generally. Guarantees that hold even in finite samples are
typically slightly more conservative. Note that in the scheme of things, these numbers
are not so far apart, reflecting the general usefulness of asymptotic analysis for giving us
ballpark figures even if they are not guarantees we can take to court.
4.6.2 Test Set Reuse
In some sense, you are now set up to succeed at conducting empirical machine learning
research. Nearly all practical models are developed and validated based on test set perfor
mance and you are now a master of the test set. For any fixed classifier 𝑓, you know how
to evaluate its test error 𝜖D( 𝑓), and know precisely what can (and cannot) be said about its
population error 𝜖( 𝑓).
So let’s say that you take this knowledge and prepare to train your first model 𝑓1. Knowing
just how confident you need to be in the performance of your classifier’serrorrateyouapply
our analysis above to determine an appropriate number of examples to set aside for the test
set. Moreover, let’s assume that you took the lessons from Section 3.6 to heart and made
sure to preserve the sanctity of the test set by conducting all of your preliminary analysis,
hyperparameter tuning, and even selection among multiple competing model architectures
onavalidation set. Finally you evaluate your model 𝑓1 on the test set and report an unbiased
estimate of the population error with an associated confidence interval.
So far everything seems to be going well. However, that night you wake up at 3am with
a brilliant idea for a new modeling approach. The next day, you code up your new model,
tune its hyperparameters on the validation set and not only are you getting your new model
𝑓2 to work but its error rate appears to be much lower than 𝑓1’s. However, the thrill of
discovery suddenly fades as you prepare for the final evaluation. You do not have a test
set!
Eventhough theoriginal test set D isstill sitting on your server, younowfacetwoformidable
problems. First, when you collected your test set, you determined the required level of pre
cision under the assumption that you were evaluating a single classifier 𝑓. However, if
you get into the business of evaluating multiple classifiers 𝑓1, ..., 𝑓𝑘 on the same test set,
you must consider the problem of false discovery. Before, you might have been 95% sure
151
Generalization in Classification
that 𝜖D( 𝑓) ∈ 𝜖( 𝑓) ± 0.01 for a single classifier 𝑓 and thus the probability of a misleading
result was a mere 5%. With 𝑘 classifiers in the mix, it can be hard to guarantee that there
is not even one among them whose test set performance is misleading. With 20 classifiers
under consideration, you might have no power at all to rule out the possibility that at least
one among them received a misleading score. This problem relates to multiple hypothesis
testing, which despite a vast literature in statistics, remains a persistent problem plaguing
scientific research.
If that is not enough to worry you, there is a special reason to distrust the results that you
get on subsequent evaluations. Recall that our analysis of test set performance rested on
the assumption that the classifier was chosen absent any contact with the test set and thus
we could view the test set as drawn randomly from the underlying population. Here, not
only are you testing multiple functions, the subsequent function 𝑓2 was chosen after you
observed the test set performance of 𝑓1. Once information from the test set has leaked
to the modeler, it can never be a true test set again in the strictest sense. This problem is
called adaptive overfitting and has recently emerged as a topic of intense interest to learning
theorists and statisticians (Dwork et al., 2015). Fortunately, while it is possible to leak all
information out of a holdout set, and the theoretical worst case scenarios are bleak, these
analyses may be too conservative. In practice, take care to create real test sets, to consult
them as infrequently as possible, to account for multiple hypothesis testing when reporting
confidence intervals, and to dial up your vigilance more aggressively when the stakes are
high and your dataset size is small. When running a series of benchmark challenges, it is
often good practice to maintain several test sets so that after each round, the old test set can
be demoted to a validation set.
4.6.3 Statistical Learning Theory
Put simply, test sets are all that we really have, and yet this fact seems strangely unsatisfy
ing. First, we seldom possess a true test set—unless we are the ones creating the dataset,
someone else has probably already evaluated their own classifier on our ostensible “test
set”. And even when we have first dibs, we soon find ourselves frustrated, wishing we
could evaluate our subsequent modeling attempts without the gnawing feeling that we can
not trust our numbers. Moreover, even a true test set can only tell us post hoc whether a
classifier has in fact generalized to the population, not whether we have any reason to expect
a priori that it should generalize.
With these misgivings in mind, you might now be sufficiently primed to see the appeal of
statistical learning theory, the mathematical subfield of machine learning whose practi
tioners aim to elucidate the fundamental principles that explain why/when models trained
on empirical data can/will generalize to unseen data. One of the primary aims of statistical
learning researchers has been to bound the generalization gap, relating the properties of the
model class to the number of samples in the dataset.
Learning theorists aim to bound the difference between the empirical error 𝜖S( 𝑓S) of a
learned classifier 𝑓S, both trained and evaluated on the training set S, and the true error
𝜖( 𝑓S) of that same classifier on the underlying population. This might look similar to
the evaluation problem that we just addressed but there is a major difference. Earlier, the
152
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
classifier 𝑓 was fixed and we only needed a dataset for evaluative purposes. And indeed,
any fixed classifier does generalize: its error on a (previously unseen) dataset is an unbiased
estimate of the population error. But what can we say when a classifier is trained and
evaluated on the same dataset? Can we ever be confident that the training error will be
close to the testing error?
Suppose that our learned classifier 𝑓S must be chosen from some pre-specified set of func
tions F. Recall from our discussion of test sets that while it is easy to estimate the error of a
single classifier, things get hairy when we begin to consider collections of classifiers. Even
if the empirical error of any one (fixed) classifier will be close to its true error with high
probability, once we consider a collection of classifiers, we need to worry about the possi
bility that just one of them will receive a badly estimated error. The worry is that we might
pick such a classifier and thereby grossly underestimate the population error. Moreover,
even for linear models, because their parameters are continuously valued, we are typically
choosing from an infinite class of functions (|F | = ∞).
One ambitious solution to the problem is to develop analytic tools for proving uniform
convergence, i.e., that with high probability, the empirical error rate for every classifier
in the class 𝑓 ∈ F will simultaneously converge to its true error rate. In other words,
we seek a theoretical principle that would allow us to state that with probability at least
1 − 𝛿 (for some small 𝛿) no classifier’s error rate 𝜖( 𝑓) (among all classifiers in the class
F) will be misestimated by more than some small amount 𝛼. Clearly, we cannot make
such statements for all model classes F. Recall the class of memorization machines that
always achieve empirical error 0 but never outperform random guessing on the underlying
population.
In a sense the class of memorizers is too flexible. No such a uniform convergence result
could possibly hold. Ontheotherhand, afixedclassifierisuseless—itgeneralizesperfectly,
but fits neither the training data nor the test data. The central question of learning has
thus historically been framed as a trade-off between more flexible (higher variance) model
classes that better fit the training data but risk overfitting, versus more rigid (higher bias)
model classes that generalize well but risk underfitting. A central question in learning
theory has been to develop the appropriate mathematical analysis to quantify where a model
sits along this spectrum, and to provide the associated guarantees.
In a series of seminal papers, Vapnik and Chervonenkis extended the theory on the con
vergence of relative frequencies to more general classes of functions (Vapnik and Cher
vonenkis, 1964, Vapnik and Chervonenkis, 1968, Vapnik and Chervonenkis, 1971, Vap
nik and Chervonenkis, 1981, Vapnik and Chervonenkis, 1991, Vapnik and Chervonenkis,
1974). One of the key contributions of this line of work is the Vapnik–Chervonenkis (VC)
dimension, which measures (one notion of) the complexity (flexibility) of a model class.
Moreover, one of their key results bounds the difference between the empirical error and
the population error as a function of the VC dimension and the number of samples:
𝑃 𝑅[𝑝, 𝑓] − 𝑅emp[X,Y, 𝑓] < 𝛼 ≥ 1−𝛿 for 𝛼 ≥ 𝑐
(VC−log𝛿)/𝑛.
(4.6.4)
Here 𝛿 > 0 is the probability that the bound is violated, 𝛼 is the upper bound on the
generalization gap, and 𝑛 is the dataset size. Lastly, 𝑐 > 0 is a constant that depends only
153
Generalization in Classification
on the scale of the loss that can be incurred. One use of the bound might be to plug in
desired values of 𝛿 and 𝛼 to determine how many samples to collect. The VC dimension
quantifies the largest number of data points for which we can assign any arbitrary (binary)
labeling and for each find some model 𝑓 in the class that agrees with that labeling. For
example, linear models on 𝑑-dimensional inputs have VC dimension 𝑑 + 1. It is easy to
see that a line can assign any possible labeling to three points in two dimensions, but not
to four. Unfortunately, the theory tends to be overly pessimistic for more complex models
and obtaining this guarantee typically requires far more examples than are actually needed
to achieve the desired error rate. Note also that fixing the model class and 𝛿, our error rate
again decays with the usual O(1/√𝑛) rate. It seems unlikely that we could do better in
terms of 𝑛. However, as we vary the model class, VC dimension can present a pessimistic
picture of the generalization gap.
4.6.4 Summary
The most straightforward way to evaluate a model is to consult a test set comprised of pre
viously unseen data. Test set evaluations provide an unbiased estimate of the true error
and converge at the desired O(1/√𝑛) rate as the test set grows. We can provide approx
imate confidence intervals based on exact asymptotic distributions or valid finite sample
confidence intervals based on (more conservative) finite sample guarantees. Indeed test
set evaluation is the bedrock of modern machine learning research. However, test sets are
seldom true test sets (used by multiple researchers again and again). Once the same test set
is used to evaluate multiple models, controlling for false discovery can be difficult. This
can cause huge problems in theory. In practice, the significance of the problem depends on
the size of the holdout sets in question and whether they are merely being used to choose
hyperparameters or if they are leaking information more directly. Nevertheless, it is good
practice to curate real test sets (or multiple) and to be as conservative as possible about how
often they are used.
Hoping to provide a more satisfying solution, statistical learning theorists have developed
methods for guaranteeing uniform convergence over a model class. If indeed every model’s
empirical error simultaneously converges to its true error, then we are free to choose the
model that performs best, minimizing the training error, knowing that it too will perform
similarly well on the holdout data. Crucially, any one of such results must depend on some
property of the model class. Vladimir Vapnik and Alexey Chernovenkis introduced the VC
dimension, presenting uniform convergence results that hold for all models in a VC class.
The training errors for all models in the class are (simultaneously) guaranteed to be close
to their true errors, and guaranteed to grow even closer at O(1/√𝑛) rates. Following the
revolutionary discovery of VC dimension, numerous alternative complexity measures have
been proposed, each facilitating an analogous generalization guarantee. See Boucheron
et al. (2005) for a detailed discussion of several advanced ways of measuring function
complexity. Unfortunately, while these complexity measures have become broadly useful
tools in statistical theory, they turn out to be powerless (as straightforwardly applied) for
explaining why deep neural networks generalize. Deep neural networks often have millions
of parameters (or more), and can easily assign random labels to large collections of points.
Nevertheless, they generalize well on practical problems and, surprisingly, they often gen
154
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
100
eralize better, when they are larger and deeper, despite incurring higher VC dimensions. In
the next chapter, we will revisit generalization in the context of deep learning.
4.6.5 Exercises
1. If we wish to estimate the error of a fixed model 𝑓 to within 0.0001 with probability
greater than 99.9%, how many samples do we need?
2. Suppose that somebody else possesses a labeled test set D and only makes available the
unlabeled inputs (features). Now suppose that you can only access the test set labels by
running a model 𝑓 (with no restrictions placed on the model class) on each of the un
labeled inputs and receiving the corresponding error 𝜖D( 𝑓). How many models would
you need to evaluate before you leak the entire test set and thus could appear to have
error 0, regardless of your true error?
3. What is the VC dimension of the class of fifth-order polynomials?
4. What is the VC dimension of axis-aligned rectangles on two-dimensional data?
Discussions100.
4.7 Environment and Distribution Shift
In the previous sections, we worked through a number of hands-on applications of machine
learning, fitting models to a variety of datasets. And yet, we never stopped to contemplate
either where data came from in the first place or what we ultimately plan to do with the
outputs from our models. Too often, machine learning developers in possession of data
rush to develop models without pausing to consider these fundamental issues.
Many failed machine learning deployments can be traced back to this failure. Sometimes
models appear to perform marvelously as measured by test set accuracy but fail catastroph
ically in deployment when the distribution of data suddenly shifts. More insidiously, some
times the very deployment of a model can be the catalyst that perturbs the data distribution.
Say, for example, that we trained a model to predict who will repay rather than default on a
loan, finding that an applicant’s choice of footwear was associated with the risk of default
(Oxfords indicate repayment, sneakers indicate default). We might be inclined thereafter
to grant a loan to any applicant wearing Oxfords and to deny all applicants wearing sneak
ers.
In this case, our ill-considered leap from pattern recognition to decision-making and our
failure to critically consider the environment might have disastrous consequences. For
starters, as soon as we began making decisions based on footwear, customers would catch
on and change their behavior. Before long, all applicants would be wearing Oxfords, with
out any coincident improvement in credit-worthiness. Take a minute to digest this because
155
Environment and Distribution Shift
similar issues abound in many applications of machine learning: by introducing our model
based decisions to the environment, we might break the model.
Whilewecannot possibly give these topics a complete treatment in onesection, weaimhere
to expose some common concerns, and to stimulate the critical thinking required to detect
such situations early, mitigate damage, and use machine learning responsibly. Some of the
solutions are simple (ask for the “right” data), some are technically difficult (implement a
reinforcement learning system), and others require that we step outside the realm of sta
tistical prediction altogether and grapple with difficult philosophical questions concerning
the ethical application of algorithms.
4.7.1 Types of Distribution Shift
Tobegin, westick with the passive prediction setting considering the various ways that data
distributions might shift and what might be done to salvage model performance. Inoneclas
sic setup, we assume that our training data was sampled from some distribution 𝑝𝑆(x, 𝑦)
but that our test data will consist of unlabeled examples drawn from some different distri
bution 𝑝𝑇(x, 𝑦). Already, we must confront a sobering reality. Absent any assumptions on
how 𝑝𝑆 and 𝑝𝑇 relate to each other, learning a robust classifier is impossible.
Consider a binary classification problem, where we wish to distinguish between dogs and
cats. If the distribution can shift in arbitrary ways, then our setup permits the pathological
case in which the distribution over inputs remains constant: 𝑝𝑆(x) = 𝑝𝑇(x), but the labels
are all flipped: 𝑝𝑆(𝑦 | x) = 1− 𝑝𝑇(𝑦 | x). In other words, if God can suddenly decide that
in the future all “cats” are now dogs and what we previously called “dogs” are now cats—
without any change in the distribution of inputs 𝑝(x), then we cannot possibly distinguish
this setting from one in which the distribution did not change at all.
Fortunately, under some restricted assumptions on the waysourdatamightchangeinthefu
ture, principled algorithms can detect shift and sometimes even adapt on the fly, improving
on the accuracy of the original classifier.
Covariate Shift
Among categories of distribution shift, covariate shift may be the most widely studied.
Here, we assume that while the distribution of inputs may change over time, the labeling
function, i.e., the conditional distribution 𝑃(𝑦 | x) does not change. Statisticians call this
covariate shift because the problem arises due to a shift in the distribution of the covari
ates (features). While we can sometimes reason about distribution shift without invoking
causality, we note that covariate shift is the natural assumption to invoke in settings where
we believe that x causes 𝑦.
Consider the challenge of distinguishing cats and dogs. Our training data might consist of
images of the kind in Fig. 4.7.1.
At test time we are asked to classify the images in Fig. 4.7.2.
The training set consists of photos, while the test set contains only cartoons. Training on a
156
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
Fig. 4.7.1
Fig. 4.7.2
Training data for distinguishing cats and dogs (illustrations: Lafeez Hossain / 500px /
Getty Images; ilkermetinkursova / iStock / Getty Images Plus; GlobalP / iStock / Getty
Images Plus; Musthafa Aboobakuru / 500px / Getty Images).
Test data for distinguishing cats and dogs (illustrations: SIBAS_minich / iStock / Getty
Images Plus; Ghrzuzudu / iStock / Getty Images Plus; id-work / DigitalVision Vectors /
Getty Images; Yime / iStock / Getty Images Plus).
dataset with substantially different characteristics from the test set can spell trouble absent
a coherent plan for how to adapt to the new domain.
Label Shift
Label shift describes the converse problem. Here, we assume that the label marginal 𝑃(𝑦)
can change but the class-conditional distribution 𝑃(x | 𝑦) remains fixed across domains.
Label shift is a reasonable assumption to make when we believe that 𝑦 causes x. For ex
ample, we may want to predict diagnoses given their symptoms (or other manifestations),
even as the relative prevalence of diagnoses are changing over time. Label shift is the ap
propriate assumption here because diseases cause symptoms. In some degenerate cases the
label shift and covariate shift assumptions can hold simultaneously. For example, when the
label is deterministic, the covariate shift assumption will be satisfied, even when 𝑦 causes
x. Interestingly, in these cases, it is often advantageous to work with methods that flow
from the label shift assumption. That is because these methods tend to involve manipulat
ing objects that look like labels (often low-dimensional), as opposed to objects that look
like inputs, which tend to be high-dimensional in deep learning.
157
Environment and Distribution Shift
Fig. 4.7.3
Concept Shift
We may also encounter the related problem of concept shift, which arises when the very
definitions of labels can change. This sounds weird—a cat is a cat, no? However, other
categories are subject to changes in usage over time. Diagnostic criteria for mental illness,
what passes for fashionable, and job titles, are all subject to considerable amounts of con
cept shift. It turns out that if we navigate around the United States, shifting the source of
our data by geography, we will find considerable concept shift regarding the distribution of
names for soft drinks as shown in Fig. 4.7.3.
Concept shift for soft drink names in the United States (CC-BY: Alan McConchie,
PopVsSoda.com).
If we were to build a machine translation system, the distribution 𝑃(𝑦 | x) might be dif
ferent depending on our location. This problem can be tricky to spot. We might hope to
exploit knowledge that shift only takes place gradually either in a temporal or geographic
sense.
4.7.2 Examples of Distribution Shift
Before delving into formalism and algorithms, we can discuss some concrete situations
where covariate or concept shift might not be obvious.
Medical Diagnostics
Imagine that you want to design an algorithm to detect cancer. Youcollectdatafromhealthy
and sick people and you train your algorithm. It works fine, giving you high accuracy and
you conclude that you are ready for a successful career in medical diagnostics. Not so
fast.
The distributions that gave rise to the training data and those you will encounter in the wild
158
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
might differ considerably. This happened to an unfortunate startup that some of we authors
worked with years ago. They were developing a blood test for a disease that predominantly
affects older men and hoped to study it using blood samples that they had collected from
patients. However, it is considerably more difficult to obtain blood samples from healthy
men than from sick patients already in the system. To compensate, the startup solicited
blood donations from students on a university campus to serve as healthy controls in de
veloping their test. Then they asked whether we could help them to build a classifier for
detecting the disease.
As we explained to them, it would indeed be easy to distinguish between the healthy and
sick cohorts with near-perfect accuracy. However, that is because the test subjects differed
in age, hormone levels, physical activity, diet, alcohol consumption, and many more fac
tors unrelated to the disease. This was unlikely to be the case with real patients. Due to
their sampling procedure, we could expect to encounter extreme covariate shift. Moreover,
this case was unlikely to be correctable via conventional methods. In short, they wasted a
significant sum of money.
Self-Driving Cars
Say a company wanted to leverage machine learning for developing self-driving cars. One
key component here is a roadside detector. Since real annotated data is expensive to get,
they had the (smart and questionable) idea to use synthetic data from a game rendering
engine as additional training data. This worked really well on “test data” drawn from the
rendering engine. Alas, inside a real car it was a disaster. As it turned out, the roadside had
been rendered with a very simplistic texture. More importantly, all the roadside had been
rendered with the same texture and the roadside detector learned about this “feature” very
quickly.
A similar thing happened to the US Army when they first tried to detect tanks in the forest.
They took aerial photographs of the forest without tanks, then drove the tanks into the forest
and took another set of pictures. The classifier appeared to work perfectly. Unfortunately, it
had merely learned how to distinguish trees with shadows from trees without shadows—the
first set of pictures was taken in the early morning, the second set at noon.
Nonstationary Distributions
A much more subtle situation arises when the distribution changes slowly (also known
as nonstationary distribution) and the model is not updated adequately. Below are some
typical cases.
• Wetrainacomputational advertising model and then fail to update it frequently (e.g., we
forget to incorporate that an obscure new device called an iPad was just launched).
• Webuild a spam filter. It works well at detecting all spam that we have seen so far. But
then the spammers wise up and craft new messages that look unlike anything we have
seen before.
159
Environment and Distribution Shift
• We build a product recommendation system. It works throughout the winter but then
continues to recommend Santa hats long after Christmas.
More Anecdotes
• Webuild a face detector. It works well on all benchmarks. Unfortunately it fails on test
data—the offending examples are close-ups where the face fills the entire image (no
such data was in the training set).
• Webuild a web search engine for the US market and want to deploy it in the UK.
• Wetrain an image classifier by compiling a large dataset where each among a large set
of classes is equally represented in the dataset, say 1000 categories, represented by
1000 images each. Then we deploy the system in the real world, where the actual
label distribution of photographs is decidedly non-uniform.
4.7.3 Correction of Distribution Shift
As we have discussed, there are many cases where training and test distributions 𝑃(x, 𝑦)
are different. In some cases, we get lucky and the models work despite covariate, label,
or concept shift. In other cases, we can do better by employing principled strategies to
cope with the shift. The remainder of this section grows considerably more technical. The
impatient reader could continue on to the next section as this material is not prerequisite to
subsequent concepts.
Empirical Risk and Risk
Let’s first reflect on what exactly is happening during model training: we iterate over fea
tures and associated labels of training data {(x1, 𝑦1), . . . , (x𝑛, 𝑦𝑛)} and update the param
eters of a model 𝑓 after every minibatch. For simplicity we do not consider regularization,
so we largely minimize the loss on the training:
𝑛
minimize
𝑓
1
𝑛
𝑖=1
𝑙( 𝑓 (x𝑖), 𝑦𝑖),
(4.7.1)
where 𝑙 is the loss function measuring “how bad” the prediction 𝑓 (x𝑖) is given the associ
ated label 𝑦𝑖. Statisticians call the term in (4.7.1) empirical risk. The empirical risk is an
average loss over the training data for approximating the risk, which is the expectation of
the loss over the entire population of data drawn from their true distribution 𝑝(x, 𝑦):
𝐸𝑝(x,𝑦)[𝑙( 𝑓 (x), 𝑦)] =
𝑙( 𝑓 (x), 𝑦)𝑝(x, 𝑦) 𝑑x𝑑𝑦.
(4.7.2)
However, in practice we typically cannot obtain the entire population of data. Thus, em
pirical risk minimization, which is minimizing the empirical risk in (4.7.1), is a practical
strategy for machine learning, with the hope of approximately minimizing the risk.
160
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
Covariate Shift Correction
Assume that wewant to estimate some dependency 𝑃(𝑦 | x) forwhichwehavelabeleddata
(x𝑖, 𝑦𝑖). Unfortunately, the observations x𝑖 are drawn from some source distribution 𝑞(x)
rather than the target distribution 𝑝(x). Fortunately, the dependency assumption means
that the conditional distribution does not change: 𝑝(𝑦 | x) = 𝑞(𝑦 | x). If the source
distribution 𝑞(x) is “wrong”, we can correct for that by using the following simple identity
in the risk:
𝑙( 𝑓 (x), 𝑦)𝑝(𝑦 | x)𝑝(x) 𝑑x𝑑𝑦 =
𝑙( 𝑓 (x), 𝑦)𝑞(𝑦 | x)𝑞(x) 𝑝(x)
𝑞(x) 𝑑x𝑑𝑦.
(4.7.3)
In other words, we need to reweigh each data example by the ratio of the probability that it
would have been drawn from the correct distribution to that from the wrong one:
𝛽𝑖 
def
= 𝑝(x𝑖)
𝑞(x𝑖) .
(4.7.4)
Plugging in the weight 𝛽𝑖 for each data example (x𝑖, 𝑦𝑖) we can train our model using
weighted empirical risk minimization:
𝑛
minimize
𝑓
1
𝑛
𝑖=1
𝛽𝑖𝑙( 𝑓 (x𝑖), 𝑦𝑖).
(4.7.5)
Alas, we do not know that ratio, so before we can do anything useful we need to estimate
it. Many methods are available, including some fancy operator-theoretic approaches that
attempt to recalibrate the expectation operator directly using a minimum-norm or a maxi
mum entropy principle. Note that for any such approach, we need samples drawnfromboth
distributions—the “true” 𝑝, e.g., by access to test data, and the one used for generating the
training set 𝑞 (the latter is trivially available). Note however, that we only need features
x ∼ 𝑝(x); we do not need to access labels 𝑦 ∼ 𝑝(𝑦).
In this case, there exists a very effective approach that will give almost as good results
as the original: namely, logistic regression, which is a special case of softmax regression
(see Section 4.1) for binary classification. This is all that is needed to compute estimated
probability ratios. We learn a classifier to distinguish between data drawn from 𝑝(x) and
data drawn from 𝑞(x). If it is impossible to distinguish between the two distributions then
it means that the associated instances are equally likely to come from either one of those
two distributions. On the other hand, any instances that can be well discriminated should
be significantly overweighted or underweighted accordingly.
For simplicity’s sake assume that we have an equal number of instances from both distribu
tions 𝑝(x) and 𝑞(x), respectively. Now denote by 𝑧 labels that are 1 for data drawn from 𝑝
and −1 for data drawn from 𝑞. Then the probability in a mixed dataset is given by
𝑃(𝑧 = 1 | x) =
𝑝(x)
𝑝(x) + 𝑞(x) and hence 𝑃(𝑧 = 1 | x)
𝑃(𝑧 = −1 | x) = 𝑝(x)
𝑞(x) .
Thus, if we use a logistic regression approach, where 𝑃(𝑧 = 1 | x) = 1
(4.7.6)
1+exp(−ℎ(x)) (ℎ is a
161
Environment and Distribution Shift
𝛽𝑖 =
parametrized function), it follows that
1/(1 + exp(−ℎ(x𝑖)))
exp(−ℎ(x𝑖))/(1 + exp(−ℎ(x𝑖))) = exp(ℎ(x𝑖)).
(4.7.7)
As a result, we need to solve two problems: the first, to distinguish between data drawn
fromboth distributions, andthenaweightedempiricalriskminimizationproblemin(4.7.5)
where we weigh terms by 𝛽𝑖.
Now we are ready to describe a correction algorithm. Suppose that we have a training set
{(x1, 𝑦1), . . . , (x𝑛, 𝑦𝑛)} and an unlabeled test set {u1, . . .,u𝑚}. For covariate shift, we
assume that x𝑖 for all 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛 are drawn from some source distribution and u𝑖 for all
1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑚 are drawn from the target distribution. Here is a prototypical algorithm for
correcting covariate shift:
1. Createabinary-classificationtrainingset: {(x1, −1), . . . , (x𝑛, −1), (u1,1), . . . , (u𝑚,1)}.
2. Train a binary classifier using logistic regression to get the function ℎ.
3. Weigh training data using 𝛽𝑖 = exp(ℎ(x𝑖)) or better 𝛽𝑖 = min(exp(ℎ(x𝑖)),𝑐) for some
constant 𝑐.
4. Use weights 𝛽𝑖 for training on {(x1, 𝑦1),. . ., (x𝑛, 𝑦𝑛)} in (4.7.5).
Note that the above algorithm relies on a crucial assumption. For this scheme to work, we
need that each data example in the target (e.g., test time) distribution had nonzero proba
bility of occurring at training time. If we find a point where 𝑝(x) > 0 but 𝑞(x) = 0, then
the corresponding importance weight should be infinity.
Label Shift Correction
Assume that we are dealing with a classification task with 𝑘 categories. Using the same
notation in Section 4.7.3, 𝑞 and 𝑝 are the source distribution (e.g., training time) and target
distribution (e.g., test time), respectively. Assume that the distribution of labels shifts over
time: 𝑞(𝑦) ≠ 𝑝(𝑦), but the class-conditional distribution stays the same: 𝑞(x | 𝑦) = 𝑝(x |
𝑦). If the source distribution 𝑞(𝑦) is “wrong”, we can correct for that according to the
following identity in the risk as defined in (4.7.2):
𝑙( 𝑓 (x), 𝑦)𝑝(x | 𝑦)𝑝(𝑦) 𝑑x𝑑𝑦 =
𝑙( 𝑓 (x), 𝑦)𝑞(x | 𝑦)𝑞(𝑦) 𝑝(𝑦)
𝑞(𝑦) 𝑑x𝑑𝑦.
(4.7.8)
Here, our importance weights will correspond to the label likelihood ratios:
𝛽𝑖 
def
= 𝑝(𝑦𝑖)
𝑞(𝑦𝑖) .
(4.7.9)
One nice thing about label shift is that if we have a reasonably good model on the source
distribution, then we can get consistent estimates of these weights without ever having to
deal with the ambient dimension. In deep learning, the inputs tend to be high-dimensional
objects like images, while the labels are often simpler objects like categories.
To estimate the target label distribution, we first take our reasonably good off-the-shelf
162
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
classifier (typically trained on the training data) and compute its “confusion” matrix using
the validation set (also from the training distribution). The confusion matrix, C, is simply a
𝑘 ×𝑘 matrix, where each column corresponds to the label category (ground truth) and each
row corresponds to our model’s predicted category. Each cell’s value 𝑐𝑖𝑗 is the fraction of
total predictions on the validation set where the true label was 𝑗 and our model predicted
𝑖.
Now, we cannot calculate the confusion matrix on the target data directly because we do
not get to see the labels for the examples that we see in the wild, unless we invest in a
complex real-time annotation pipeline. What we can do, however, is average all of our
model’s predictions at test time together, yielding the mean model outputs 𝜇(ˆy) ∈ R𝑘,
where the 𝑖th element 𝜇(ˆ𝑦𝑖) is the fraction of the total predictions on the test set where our
model predicted 𝑖.
It turns out that under some mild conditions—if our classifier was reasonably accurate in
the first place, and if the target data contains only categories that we have seen before, and
if the label shift assumption holds in the first place (the strongest assumption here)—we
can estimate the test set label distribution by solving a simple linear system
C𝑝(y) = 𝜇(ˆy),
(4.7.10)
because as an estimate 𝑘
𝑗=1 𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑝(𝑦𝑗) = 𝜇(ˆ𝑦𝑖) holds for all 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘, where 𝑝(𝑦𝑗) is
the 𝑗th element of the 𝑘-dimensional label distribution vector 𝑝(y). If our classifier is
sufficiently accurate to begin with, then the confusion matrix C will be invertible, and we
get a solution 𝑝(y) = C−1𝜇(ˆy).
Because we observe the labels on the source data, it is easy to estimate the distribution
𝑞(𝑦). Then, for any training example 𝑖 with label 𝑦𝑖, we can take the ratio of our esti
mated 𝑝(𝑦𝑖)/𝑞(𝑦𝑖) to calculate the weight 𝛽𝑖, and plug this into weighted empirical risk
minimization in (4.7.5).
Concept Shift Correction
Concept shift is much harder to fix in a principled manner. Forinstance, inasituationwhere
suddenly the problem changes from distinguishing cats from dogs to one of distinguishing
white from black animals, it will be unreasonable to assume that we can do much better
than just collecting new labels and training from scratch. Fortunately, in practice, such
extreme shifts are rare. Instead, what usually happens is that the task keeps on changing
slowly. To make things more concrete, here are some examples:
• Incomputational advertising, new products are launched, old products become less pop
ular. This means that the distribution over ads and their popularity changes gradually
and any click-through rate predictor needs to change gradually with it.
• Traffic camera lenses degrade gradually due to environmental wear, affecting image
quality progressively.
• Newscontent changes gradually (i.e., most of the news remains unchanged but new sto
ries appear).
163
Environment and Distribution Shift
In such cases, we can use the same approach that we used for training networks to make
them adapt to the change in the data. In other words, we use the existing network weights
andsimplyperformafewupdatestepswith thenewdata ratherthan trainingfrom scratch.
4.7.4 A Taxonomy of Learning Problems
Armed with knowledge about how to deal with changes in distributions, we can now con
sider some other aspects of machine learning problem formulation.
Batch Learning
In batch learning, we have access to training features and labels {(x1, 𝑦1), . . ., (x𝑛, 𝑦𝑛)},
whichwe use to train a model 𝑓 (x). Lateron, wedeploythismodeltoscorenewdata (x, 𝑦)
drawn from the same distribution. This is the default assumption for any of the problems
that we discuss here. For instance, we might train a cat detector based on lots of pictures
of cats and dogs. Once we have trained it, we ship it as part of a smart catdoor computer
vision system that lets only cats in. This is then installed in a customer’s home and is never
updated again (barring extreme circumstances).
Online Learning
Now imagine that the data (x𝑖, 𝑦𝑖) arrives one sample at a time. More specifically, assume
that we first observe x𝑖, then we need to come up with an estimate 𝑓 (x𝑖). Only once
we have done this do we observe 𝑦𝑖 and so receive a reward or incur a loss, given our
decision. Many real problems fall into this category. For example, we need to predict
tomorrow’s stock price, which allows us to trade based on that estimate and at the end
of the day we find out whether our estimate made us a profit. In other words, in online
learning, we have the following cycle where we are continuously improving our model
given new observations:
model 𝑓𝑡 −→ data x𝑡 −→ estimate 𝑓𝑡(x𝑡) −→
observation 𝑦𝑡 −→ loss 𝑙(𝑦𝑡, 𝑓𝑡(x𝑡)) −→ model 𝑓𝑡+1
Bandits
(4.7.11)
Bandits are a special case of the problem above. While in most learning problems we have
a continuously parametrized function 𝑓 where we want to learn its parameters (e.g., a deep
network), in a bandit problem we only have a finite number of arms that we can pull, i.e.,
a finite number of actions that we can take. It is not very surprising that for this simpler
problem stronger theoretical guarantees in terms of optimality can be obtained. We list
it mainly since this problem is often (confusingly) treated as if it were a distinct learning
setting.
164
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
Control
In many cases the environment remembers what we did. Not necessarily in an adversarial
manner but it will just remember and the response will depend on what happened before.
For instance, a coffee boiler controller will observe different temperatures depending on
whether it was heating the boiler previously. PID (proportional-integral-derivative) con
troller algorithms are a popular choice there. Likewise, a user’s behavior on a news site
will depend on what we showed them previously (e.g., they will read most news only once).
Many such algorithms form a model of the environment in which they act so as to make
their decisions appear less random. Recently, control theory (e.g., PID variants) has also
been used to automatically tune hyperparameters to achieve better disentangling and recon
struction quality, and improve the diversity of generated text and the reconstruction quality
of generated images (Shao et al., 2020).
Reinforcement Learning
In the more general case of an environment with memory, we may encounter situations
where the environment is trying to cooperate with us (cooperative games, in particular
for non-zero-sum games), or others where the environment will try to win. Chess, Go,
Backgammon, or StarCraft are some of the cases in reinforcement learning. Likewise, we
might want to build a good controller for autonomous cars. Other cars are likely to respond
to the autonomous car’s driving style in nontrivial ways, e.g., trying to avoid it, trying to
cause an accident, or trying to cooperate with it.
Considering the Environment
One key distinction between the different situations above is that a strategy that might have
worked throughout in the case of a stationary environment, might not work throughout in
an environment that canadapt. Forinstance, an arbitrage opportunity discovered by a trader
is likely to disappear once it is exploited. The speed and manner at which the environment
changes determines to a large extent the type of algorithms that we can bring to bear. For
instance, if we know that things may only change slowly, we can force any estimate to
change only slowly, too. If we know that the environment might change instantaneously,
but only very infrequently, we can make allowances for that. These types of knowledge are
crucial for the aspiring data scientist in dealing with concept shift, i.e., when the problem
that is being solved can change over time.
4.7.5 Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in Machine
Learning
Finally, it is important to remember that when you deploy machine learning systems you
are not merely optimizing a predictive model—you are typically providing a tool that will
be used to (partially or fully) automate decisions. These technical systems can impact the
lives of individuals who are subject to the resulting decisions. The leap from considering
predictions to making decisions raises not only new technical questions, but also a slew of
165
Environment and Distribution Shift
ethical questions that must be carefully considered. If we are deploying a medical diagnos
tic system, we need to know for which populations it may work and for which it may not.
Overlooking foreseeable risks to the welfare of a subpopulation could cause us to adminis
ter inferior care. Moreover, once we contemplate decision-making systems, we must step
back and reconsider how we evaluate our technology. Among other consequences of this
change of scope, wewill findthataccuracyis seldomthe right measure. Forinstance, when
translating predictions into actions, we will often want to take into account the potential cost
sensitivity of erring in various ways. If one way of misclassifying an image could be per
ceived as a racial sleight of hand, while misclassification to a different category would be
harmless, then we might want to adjust our thresholds accordingly, accounting for societal
values in designing the decision-making protocol. We also want to be careful about how
prediction systems can lead to feedback loops. For example, consider predictive policing
systems, which allocate patrol officers to areas with high forecasted crime. It is easy to see
how a worrying pattern can emerge:
1. Neighborhoods with more crime get more patrols.
2. Consequently, more crimes are discovered in these neighborhoods, entering the training
data available for future iterations.
3. Exposed to more positives, the model predicts yet more crime in these neighborhoods.
4. In the next iteration, the updated model targets the same neighborhood even more heav
ily leading to yet more crimes discovered, etc.
Often, the various mechanisms by which a model’s predictions become coupled to its train
ing data are unaccounted for in the modeling process. This can lead to what researchers
call runaway feedback loops. Additionally, we want to be careful about whether we are
addressing the right problem in the first place. Predictive algorithms now play an outsize
role in mediating the dissemination of information. Should the news that an individual en
counters be determined by the set of Facebook pages they have Liked? These are just a few
among the many pressing ethical dilemmas that you might encounter in a career in machine
learning.
4.7.6 Summary
In many cases training and test sets do not come from the same distribution. This is called
distribution shift. The risk is the expectation of the loss over the entire population of data
drawn from their true distribution. However, this entire population is usually unavailable.
Empirical risk is an average loss over the training data to approximate the risk. In practice,
we perform empirical risk minimization.
Under the corresponding assumptions, covariate and label shift can be detected and cor
rected for at test time. Failure to account for this bias can become problematic at test time.
In somecases, theenvironmentmayrememberautomatedactionsandrespondinsurprising
ways. We must account for this possibility when building models and continue to moni
tor live systems, open to the possibility that our models and the environment will become
entangled in unanticipated ways.
166
Linear Neural Networks for Classification
101
4.7.7 Exercises
1. What could happen when we change the behavior of a search engine? What might the
users do? What about the advertisers?
2. Implement a covariate shift detector. Hint: build a classifier.
3. Implement a covariate shift corrector.
4. Besides distribution shift, what else could affect how the empirical risk approximates
the risk?
Discussions101