Multilayer Perceptrons
In this chapter, we will introduce your first truly deep network. The simplest deep networks
are called multilayer perceptrons, and they consist of multiple layers of neurons each fully
connected to those in the layer below (from which they receive input) and those above
(which they, in turn, influence). Although automatic differentiation significantly simplifies
the implementation of deep learning algorithms, we will dive deep into how these gradi
ents are calculated in deep networks. Then we will be ready to discuss issues relating to
numerical stability and parameter initialization that are key to successfully training deep
networks. When we train such high-capacity models we run the risk of overfitting. Thus,
we will revisit regularization and generalization for deep networks. Throughout, we aim to
give you a firmgrasp not just of the concepts but also of the practice of using deep networks.
At the end of this chapter, we apply what we have introduced so far to a real case: house
price prediction. We punt matters relating to the computational performance, scalability,
and efficiency of our models to subsequent chapters.
5.1 Multilayer Perceptrons
In Section 4.1, we introduced softmax regression, implementing the algorithm from scratch
(Section 4.4) and usinghigh-level APIs (Section 4.5). This allowedustotrainclassifiers ca
pable of recognizing 10 categories of clothing from low-resolution images. Along the way,
we learned how to wrangle data, coerce our outputs into a valid probability distribution,
apply an appropriate loss function, and minimize it with respect to our model’s parameters.
Now that we have mastered these mechanics in the context of simple linear models, we
can launch our exploration of deep neural networks, the comparatively rich class of models
with which this book is primarily concerned.
%matplotlib inline
import torch
from d2l import torch as d2l
5.1.1 Hidden Layers
We described affine transformations in Section 3.1.1 as linear transformations with added
bias. To begin, recall the model architecture corresponding to our softmax regression ex
167
168
Multilayer Perceptrons
ample, illustrated in Fig. 4.1.1. This model maps inputs directly to outputs via a single
affine transformation, followed by a softmax operation. If our labels truly were related to
the input data by a simple affine transformation, then this approach would be sufficient.
However, linearity (in affine transformations) is a strong assumption.
Limitations of Linear Models
For example, linearity implies the weaker assumption of monotonicity, i.e., that any in
crease in our feature must either always cause an increase in our model’s output (if the
corresponding weight is positive), or always cause a decrease in our model’s output (if
the corresponding weight is negative). Sometimes that makes sense. For example, if we
were trying to predict whether an individual will repay a loan, we might reasonably assume
that all other things being equal, an applicant with a higher income would always be more
likely to repay than one with a lower income. While monotonic, this relationship likely
is not linearly associated with the probability of repayment. An increase in income from
$0 to $50,000 likely corresponds to a bigger increase in likelihood of repayment than an
increase from $1 million to $1.05 million. One way to handle this might be to postprocess
our outcome such that linearity becomes more plausible, by using the logistic map (and
thus the logarithm of the probability of outcome).
Note that we can easily come up with examples that violate monotonicity. Say for example
that we want to predict health as a function of body temperature. For individuals with a
normal body temperature above 37°C (98.6°F), higher temperatures indicate greater risk.
However, if the body temperatures drops below 37°C, lower temperatures indicate greater
risk! Again, we might resolve the problem with some clever preprocessing, such as using
the distance from 37°C as a feature.
But what about classifying images of cats and dogs? Should increasing the intensity of the
pixel at location (13, 17) always increase (or always decrease) the likelihood that the image
depicts a dog? Reliance on a linear model corresponds to the implicit assumption that the
only requirement for differentiating cats and dogs is to assess the brightness of individual
pixels. This approach is doomed to fail in a world where inverting an image preserves the
category.
And yet despite the apparent absurdity of linearity here, as compared with our previous
examples, it is less obvious that we could address the problem with a simple preprocessing
fix. That is, because the significance of any pixel depends in complex ways on its context
(the values of the surrounding pixels). While there might exist a representation of our data
that would take into account the relevant interactions among our features, on top of which
a linear model would be suitable, we simply do not know how to calculate it by hand. With
deep neural networks, we used observational data to jointly learn both a representation via
hidden layers and a linear predictor that acts upon that representation.
This problem of nonlinearity has been studied for at least a century (Fisher, 1925). For
instance, decision trees in their most basic form use a sequence of binary decisions to de
cide upon class membership (Quinlan, 1993). Likewise, kernel methods have been used
for many decades to model nonlinear dependencies (Aronszajn, 1950). This has found its
169
Multilayer Perceptrons
Fig. 5.1.1
way into nonparametric spline models (Wahba, 1990) and kernel methods (Schölkopf and
Smola, 2002). It is also something that the brain solves quite naturally. After all, neu
rons feed into other neurons which, in turn, feed into other neurons again (Ramón y Cajal
and Azoulay, 1894). Consequently we have a sequence of relatively simple transforma
tions.
Incorporating Hidden Layers
We can overcome the limitations of linear models by incorporating one or more hidden
layers. The easiest way to do this is to stack many fully connected layers on top of one
another. Each layer feeds into the layer above it, until we generate outputs. We can think of
the first 𝐿 − 1 layers as our representation and the final layer as our linear predictor. This
architecture is commonly called a multilayer perceptron, often abbreviated as MLP (Fig.
5.1.1).
An MLP with a hidden layer of five hidden units.
This MLP has four inputs, three outputs, and its hidden layer contains five hidden units.
Since the input layer does not involve any calculations, producing outputs with this network
requires implementing the computations for both the hidden and output layers; thus, the
number of layers in this MLP is two. Note that both layers are fully connected. Every
input influences every neuron in the hidden layer, and each of these in turn influences every
neuron in the output layer. Alas, we are not quite done yet.
From Linear to Nonlinear
As before, we denote by the matrix X ∈ R𝑛×𝑑 aminibatchof𝑛 exampleswhereeachexam
ple has 𝑑 inputs (features). For a one-hidden-layer MLP whose hidden layer has ℎ hidden
units, we denote by H ∈ R𝑛×ℎ the outputs of the hidden layer, which are hidden represen
tations. Since the hidden and output layers are both fully connected, we have hidden-layer
weights W(1) ∈ R𝑑×ℎ and biases b(1) ∈ R1×ℎ and output-layer weights W(2) ∈ Rℎ×𝑞 and
biases b(2) ∈ R1×𝑞. This allows us to calculate the outputs O ∈ R𝑛×𝑞 of the one-hidden
layer MLP as follows:
H=XW(1) +b(1),
O=HW(2) +b(2).
(5.1.1)
Note that after adding the hidden layer, our model now requires us to track and update
additional sets of parameters. So what havewegainedinexchange? Youmightbesurprised
170
Multilayer Perceptrons
to find out that—in the model defined above—wegain nothing for our troubles! Thereason
is plain. The hiddenunitsabovearegivenbyanaffinefunctionoftheinputs, andtheoutputs
(pre-softmax) are just an affine function of the hidden units. An affine function of an affine
function is itself an affine function. Moreover, our linear model was already capable of
representing any affine function.
Tosee this formallywecan just collapseout thehidden layer in theabovedefinition, yielding
an equivalent single-layer model with parameters W = W(1)W(2) and b = b(1)W(2) +
b(2):
O=(XW(1) +b(1))W(2) +b(2) = XW(1)W(2) +b(1)W(2) +b(2) = XW+b.
(5.1.2)
In order to realize the potential of multilayer architectures, we need one more key ingre
dient: a nonlinear activation function 𝜎 to be applied to each hidden unit following the
affine transformation. For instance, a popular choice is the ReLU (rectified linear unit) ac
tivation function (Nair and Hinton, 2010) 𝜎(𝑥) = max(0,𝑥) operating on its arguments
elementwise. The outputs of activation functions 𝜎(·) are called activations. In general,
with activation functions in place, it is no longer possible to collapse our MLP into a linear
model:
H=𝜎(XW(1) +b(1)),
O=HW(2) +b(2).
(5.1.3)
Since each row in X corresponds to an example in the minibatch, with some abuse of
notation, we define the nonlinearity 𝜎 to apply to its inputs in a rowwise fashion, i.e., one
example at a time. Note that we used the same notation for softmax when we denoted a
rowwise operation in Section 4.1.1. Quite frequently the activation functions we use apply
not merely rowwise but elementwise. That means that after computing the linear portion of
the layer, we can calculate each activation without looking at the values taken by the other
hidden units.
To build more general MLPs, we can continue stacking such hidden layers, e.g., H(1) =
𝜎1(XW(1)+b(1)) andH(2) = 𝜎2(H(1)W(2)+b(2)),oneatopanother, yieldingevermore
expressive models.
Universal Approximators
We know that the brain is capable of very sophisticated statistical analysis. As such, it is
worth asking, just how powerful a deep network could be. This question has been answered
multiple times, e.g., in Cybenko (1989) in the context of MLPs, and in Micchelli (1984) in
the context of reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces in a way that could be seen as radial basis
function (RBF) networks with asingle hidden layer. These (and related results) suggest that
even with a single-hidden-layer network, given enough nodes (possibly absurdly many),
and the right set of weights, we can model any function. Actually learning that function
is the hard part, though. You might think of your neural network as being a bit like the
C programming language. The language, like any other modern language, is capable of
171
Multilayer Perceptrons
expressing any computable program. But actually coming up with a program that meets
your specifications is the hard part.
Moreover, just because a single-hidden-layer network can learn any function does not mean
that you should try to solve all of your problems with one. In fact, in this case kernel
methods are way more effective, since they are capable of solving the problem exactly even
in infinite dimensional spaces (Kimeldorf and Wahba, 1971, Schölkopf et al., 2001). In
fact, we can approximate many functions much more compactly by using deeper (rather
than wider) networks (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014). We will touch upon more rigorous
arguments in subsequent chapters.
5.1.2 Activation Functions
Activation functions decide whether a neuron should be activated or not by calculating the
weighted sum and further adding bias to it. They are differentiable operators for trans
forming input signals to outputs, while most of them add nonlinearity. Because activation
functions are fundamental to deep learning, let’s briefly survey some common ones.
ReLU Function
The most popular choice, due to both simplicity of implementation and its good perfor
mance on avariety of predictive tasks, is the rectified linear unit (ReLU) (Nair and Hinton,
2010). ReLU provides a very simple nonlinear transformation. Given an element 𝑥, the
function is defined as the maximum of that element and 0:
ReLU(𝑥) = max(𝑥,0).
(5.1.4)
Informally, the ReLU function retains only positive elements and discards all negative el
ements by setting the corresponding activations to 0. To gain some intuition, we can plot
the function. As you can see, the activation function is piecewise linear.
x = torch.arange(-8.0, 8.0, 0.1, requires_grad=True)
y = torch.relu(x)
d2l.plot(x.detach(), y.detach(), 'x', 'relu(x)', figsize=(5, 2.5))
When the input is negative, the derivative of the ReLU function is 0, and when the input
is positive, the derivative of the ReLU function is 1. Note that the ReLU function is not
172
Multilayer Perceptrons
differentiable when the input takes value precisely equal to 0. In these cases, we default to
the left-hand-side derivative and say that the derivative is 0 when the input is 0. We can
get away with this because the input may never actually be zero (mathematicians would say
that it is nondifferentiable on a set of measure zero). There is an old adage that if subtle
boundary conditions matter, we are probably doing (real) mathematics, not engineering.
That conventional wisdom may apply here, or at least, the fact that we are not performing
constrained optimization (Mangasarian, 1965, Rockafellar, 1970). We plot the derivative
of the ReLU function below.
y.backward(torch.ones_like(x), retain_graph=True)
d2l.plot(x.detach(), x.grad, 'x', 'grad of relu', figsize=(5, 2.5))
The reason for using ReLU is that its derivatives are particularly well behaved: either they
vanish or they just let the argument through. This makes optimization better behaved and
it mitigated the well-documented problem of vanishing gradients that plagued previous
versions of neural networks (more on this later).
Note that there are many variants to the ReLU function, including the parametrized ReLU
(pReLU) function (He et al., 2015). This variation adds a linear term to ReLU, so some
information still gets through, even when the argument is negative:
pReLU(𝑥) = max(0,𝑥) + 𝛼min(0,𝑥).
Sigmoid Function
(5.1.5)
The sigmoid function transforms those inputs whose values lie in the domain R, to outputs
that lie on the interval (0, 1). For that reason, the sigmoid is often called a squashing func
tion: it squashes any input in the range (-inf, inf) to some value in the range (0, 1):
sigmoid(𝑥) =
1
1 +exp(−𝑥) .
(5.1.6)
In the earliest neural networks, scientists were interested in modeling biological neurons
that either fire or do not fire. Thus the pioneers of this field, going all the way back to
McCulloch and Pitts, the inventors of the artificial neuron, focused on thresholding units
(McCulloch and Pitts, 1943). A thresholding activation takes value 0 when its input is
below some threshold and value 1 when the input exceeds the threshold.
173
Multilayer Perceptrons
When attention shifted to gradient-based learning, thesigmoidfunctionwasanaturalchoice
because it is a smooth, differentiable approximation to a thresholding unit. Sigmoids are
still widely used as activation functions on the output units when we want to interpret the
outputs as probabilities for binary classification problems: you can think of the sigmoid as a
special case of the softmax. However, the sigmoid has largely been replaced by the simpler
and more easily trainable ReLU for most use in hidden layers. Much of this has to do with
the fact that the sigmoid poses challenges for optimization (LeCun et al., 1998) since its
gradient vanishes for large positive and negative arguments. This can lead to plateaus that
are difficult to escape from. Nonetheless sigmoids are important. In later chapters (e.g.,
Section 10.1) on recurrent neural networks, we will describe architectures that leverage
sigmoid units to control the flow of information across time.
Below, we plot the sigmoid function. Note that when the input is close to 0, the sigmoid
function approaches a linear transformation.
y = torch.sigmoid(x)
d2l.plot(x.detach(), y.detach(), 'x', 'sigmoid(x)', figsize=(5, 2.5))
The derivative of the sigmoid function is given by the following equation:
𝑑
𝑑𝑥 sigmoid(𝑥) =
exp(−𝑥)
(1 + exp(−𝑥))2 
= sigmoid(𝑥) (1 − sigmoid(𝑥)) .
(5.1.7)
The derivative of the sigmoid function is plotted below. Note that when the input is 0, the
derivative of the sigmoid function reaches a maximum of 0.25. As the input diverges from
0 in either direction, the derivative approaches 0.
# Clear out previous gradients
x.grad.data.zero_()
y.backward(torch.ones_like(x),retain_graph=True)
d2l.plot(x.detach(), x.grad, 'x', 'grad of sigmoid', figsize=(5, 2.5))
Tanh Function
Like the sigmoid function, the tanh (hyperbolic tangent) function also squashes its inputs,
transforming them into elements on the interval between −1 and 1:
tanh(𝑥) = 1 −exp(−2𝑥)
1 +exp(−2𝑥) .
(5.1.8)
174
Multilayer Perceptrons
We plot the tanh function below. Note that as input nears 0, the tanh function approaches a
linear transformation. Although the shape of the function is similar to that of the sigmoid
function, the tanh function exhibits point symmetry about the origin of the coordinate sys
tem (Kalman and Kwasny, 1992).
y = torch.tanh(x)
d2l.plot(x.detach(), y.detach(), 'x', 'tanh(x)', figsize=(5, 2.5))
The derivative of the tanh function is:
𝑑
𝑑𝑥 tanh(𝑥) = 1 −tanh2(𝑥).
(5.1.9)
It is plotted below. As the input nears 0, the derivative of the tanh function approaches a
maximum of 1. And as we saw with the sigmoid function, as input moves away from 0 in
either direction, the derivative of the tanh function approaches 0.
# Clear out previous gradients
x.grad.data.zero_()
y.backward(torch.ones_like(x),retain_graph=True)
d2l.plot(x.detach(), x.grad, 'x', 'grad of tanh', figsize=(5, 2.5))
5.1.3 Summary and Discussion
We now know how to incorporate nonlinearities to build expressive multilayer neural net
work architectures. As a side note, your knowledge already puts you in command of a sim
ilar toolkit to a practitioner circa 1990. In some ways, you have an advantage over anyone
175
Multilayer Perceptrons
102
working back then, because you can leverage powerful open-source deep learning frame
works to build models rapidly, using only a few lines of code. Previously, training these
networks required researchers to code up layers and derivatives explicitly in C, Fortran, or
even Lisp (in the case of LeNet).
A secondary benefit is that ReLU is significantly more amenable to optimization than the
sigmoid or the tanh function. One could argue that this was one of the key innovations that
helped the resurgence of deep learning over the past decade. Note, though, that research in
activation functions has not stopped. For instance, the GELU (Gaussian error linear unit)
activation function 𝑥Φ(𝑥) by Hendrycks and Gimpel (2016) (Φ(𝑥) is the standard Gaussian
cumulative distribution function) and the Swish activation function 𝜎(𝑥) = 𝑥 sigmoid(𝛽𝑥)
as proposed in Ramachandran et al. (2017) can yield better accuracy in many cases.
5.1.4 Exercises
1. Show that adding layers to a linear deep network, i.e., a network without nonlinearity
𝜎 can never increase the expressive power of the network. Give an example where it
actively reduces it.
2. Compute the derivative of the pReLU activation function.
3. Compute the derivative of the Swish activation function 𝑥 sigmoid(𝛽𝑥).
4. Show that an MLP using only ReLU (or pReLU) constructs a continuous piecewise
linear function.
5. Sigmoid and tanh are very similar.
1. Show that tanh(𝑥) + 1 = 2sigmoid(2𝑥).
2. Prove that the function classes parametrized by both nonlinearities are identical.
Hint: affine layers have bias terms, too.
6. Assume that we have a nonlinearity that applies to one minibatch at a time, such as the
batch normalization (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015). What kinds of problems do you expect
this to cause?
7. Provide an example where the gradients vanish for the sigmoid activation function.
Discussions102.
176
Multilayer Perceptrons
5.2 Implementation of Multilayer Perceptrons
Multilayer perceptrons (MLPs)arenotmuchmorecomplextoimplementthansimplelinear
models. The key conceptual difference is that we now concatenate multiple layers.
import torch
from torch import nn
from d2l import torch as d2l
5.2.1 Implementation from Scratch
Let’s begin again by implementing such a network from scratch.
Initializing Model Parameters
Recall that Fashion-MNIST contains 10 classes, and that each image consists of a 28 ×
28 = 784 grid of grayscale pixel values. As before we will disregard the spatial structure
among the pixels for now, so we can think of this as a classification dataset with 784 input
features and 10classes. Tobegin, wewillimplementanMLPwithonehiddenlayerand256
hidden units. Both the number of layers and their width are adjustable (they are considered
hyperparameters). Typically, we choose the layer widths to be divisible by larger powers of
2. This is computationally efficient due to the way memory is allocated and addressed in
hardware.
Again, we will represent our parameters with several tensors. Note that for every layer, we
must keep track of one weight matrix and one bias vector. As always, we allocate memory
for the gradients of the loss with respect to these parameters.
In the code below we use nn.Parameter to automatically register a class attribute as a
parameter to be tracked by autograd (Section 2.5).
class MLPScratch(d2l.Classifier):
def __init__(self, num_inputs, num_outputs, num_hiddens, lr, sigma=0.01):
super().__init__()
self.save_hyperparameters()
self.W1 = nn.Parameter(torch.randn(num_inputs, num_hiddens) * sigma)
self.b1 = nn.Parameter(torch.zeros(num_hiddens))
self.W2 = nn.Parameter(torch.randn(num_hiddens, num_outputs) * sigma)
self.b2 = nn.Parameter(torch.zeros(num_outputs))
Model
To make sure we know how everything works, we will implement the ReLU activation
ourselves rather than invoking the built-in relu function directly.
177
Implementation of Multilayer Perceptrons
def relu(X):
a = torch.zeros_like(X)
return torch.max(X, a)
Since we are disregarding spatial structure, we reshape each two-dimensional image into
a flat vector of length num_inputs. Finally, we implement our model with just a few lines
of code. Since we use the framework built-in autograd this is all that it takes.
@d2l.add_to_class(MLPScratch)
def forward(self, X):
X = X.reshape((-1, self.num_inputs))
H = relu(torch.matmul(X, self.W1) + self.b1)
return torch.matmul(H, self.W2) + self.b2
Training
Fortunately, the training loop for MLPs is exactly the same as for softmax regression.
We define the model, data, and trainer, then finally invoke the fit method on model and
data.
model = MLPScratch(num_inputs=784, num_outputs=10, num_hiddens=256, lr=0.1)
data = d2l.FashionMNIST(batch_size=256)
trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10)
trainer.fit(model, data)
5.2.2 Concise Implementation
As you might expect, by relying on the high-level APIs, we can implement MLPs even
more concisely.
Model
Comparedwithour conciseimplementation ofsoftmax regressionimplementation(Section
4.5), the onlydifferenceisthatweaddtwofullyconnectedlayerswherewepreviouslyadded
only one. The first is the hidden layer, the second is the output layer.
178
Multilayer Perceptrons
class MLP(d2l.Classifier):
def __init__(self, num_outputs, num_hiddens, lr):
super().__init__()
self.save_hyperparameters()
self.net = nn.Sequential(nn.Flatten(), nn.LazyLinear(num_hiddens),
nn.ReLU(), nn.LazyLinear(num_outputs))
Previously, we defined forward methods for models to transform input using the model
parameters. These operations are essentially a pipeline: you take an input and apply a
transformation (e.g., matrix multiplication with weights followed by bias addition), then
repetitively use the output of the current transformation as input to the next transforma
tion. However, you may have noticed that no forward method is defined here. In fact,
MLP inherits the forward method from the Module class (Section 3.2.2) to simply invoke
self.net(X) (X is input), which is now defined as a sequence of transformations via the
Sequential class. The Sequential class abstracts the forward process enabling us to fo
cus on the transformations. We will further discuss how the Sequential class works in
Section 6.1.2.
Training
The training loop is exactly the same as when we implemented softmax regression. This
modularity enables us to separate matters concerning the model architecture from orthog
onal considerations.
model = MLP(num_outputs=10, num_hiddens=256, lr=0.1)
trainer.fit(model, data)
5.2.3 Summary
Now that we have more practice in designing deep networks, the step from a single to mul
tiple layers of deep networks does not pose such a significant challenge any longer. In
particular, we can reuse the training algorithm and data loader. Note, though, that imple
menting MLPs from scratch is nonetheless messy: naming and keeping track of the model
parameters makes it difficult to extend models. For instance, imagine wanting to insert
another layer between layers 42 and 43. This might now be layer 42b, unless we are willing
179
Implementation of Multilayer Perceptrons
103
to perform sequential renaming. Moreover, if we implement the network from scratch, it
is much more difficult for the framework to perform meaningful performance optimiza
tions.
Nonetheless, you have now reached the state of the art of the late 1980s when fully con
nected deep networks were the method of choice for neural network modeling. Our next
conceptual step will be to consider images. Before we do so, we need to review a number
of statistical basics and details on how to compute models efficiently.
5.2.4 Exercises
1. Change the number of hidden units num_hiddens and plot how its number affects the
accuracy of the model. What is the best value of this hyperparameter?
2. Try adding a hidden layer to see how it affects the results.
3. Whyisitabadideatoinsertahiddenlayerwithasingleneuron? Whatcouldgowrong?
4. Howdoeschanging the learning rate alter your results? With all other parameters fixed,
which learning rate gives you the best results? How does this relate to the number of
epochs?
5. Let’s optimize over all hyperparameters jointly, i.e., learning rate, number of epochs,
number of hidden layers, and number of hidden units per layer.
1. What is the best result you can get by optimizing over all of them?
2. Whyit is much more challenging to deal with multiple hyperparameters?
3. Describe an efficient strategy for optimizing over multiple parameters jointly.
6. Compare the speed of the framework and the from-scratch implementation for a chal
lenging problem. How does it change with the complexity of the network?
7. Measure the speed of tensor–matrix multiplications for well-aligned and misaligned
matrices. For instance, test for matrices with dimension 1024, 1025, 1026, 1028, and
1032.
1. Howdoes this change between GPUs and CPUs?
2. Determine the memory bus width of your CPU and GPU.
8. Try out different activation functions. Which one works best?
9. Is there a difference between weight initializations of the network? Does it matter?
Discussions103.
180
Multilayer Perceptrons
5.3 Forward Propagation, Backward Propagation,
and Computational Graphs
So far, we have trained our models with minibatch stochastic gradient descent. However,
when we implemented the algorithm, we only worried about the calculations involved in
forward propagation through the model. When it came time to calculate the gradients, we
just invoked the backpropagation function provided by the deep learning framework.
The automatic calculation of gradients profoundly simplifies the implementation of deep
learning algorithms. Before automatic differentiation, even small changes to complicated
models required recalculating complicated derivatives by hand. Surprisingly often, aca
demic papers had to allocate numerous pages to deriving update rules. While we must
continue to rely on automatic differentiation so we can focus on the interesting parts, you
ought to know how these gradients are calculated under the hood if you want to go beyond
a shallow understanding of deep learning.
In this section, we take a deep dive into the details of backward propagation (more com
monly called backpropagation). To convey some insight for both the techniques and their
implementations, we rely on some basic mathematics and computational graphs. To start,
we focus our exposition on a one-hidden-layer MLP with weight decay (ℓ2 regularization,
to be described in subsequent chapters).
5.3.1 Forward Propagation
Forward propagation (or forward pass) refers to the calculation and storage of intermediate
variables (including outputs) for a neural network in order from the input layer to the output
layer. We now work step-by-step through the mechanics of a neural network with one
hidden layer. This mayseemtediousbutintheeternalwordsoffunkvirtuosoJamesBrown,
you must “pay the cost to be the boss”.
For the sake of simplicity, let’s assume that the input example is x ∈ R𝑑 and that our hidden
layer does not include a bias term. Here the intermediate variable is:
z = W(1)x,
(5.3.1)
where W(1) ∈ Rℎ×𝑑 is the weight parameter of the hidden layer. After running the inter
mediate variable z ∈ Rℎ through the activation function 𝜙 we obtain our hidden activation
vector of length ℎ:
h = 𝜙(z).
(5.3.2)
The hidden layer output h is also an intermediate variable. Assuming that the parameters
of the output layer possess only a weight of W(2) ∈ R𝑞×ℎ, we can obtain an output layer
variable with a vector of length 𝑞:
o =W(2)h.
(5.3.3)
181
Forward Propagation, Backward Propagation, and Computational Graphs
Fig. 5.3.1
Assuming that the loss function is 𝑙 and the example label is 𝑦, we can then calculate the
loss term for a single data example,
(5.3.4)
𝐿 =𝑙(o,𝑦).
As we will see the definition of ℓ2 regularization to be introduced later, given the hyperpa
rameter 𝜆, the regularization term is
𝑠 = 𝜆
2 W(1) 2
F +W(2) 2
F ,
(5.3.5)
where the Frobenius norm of the matrix is simply the ℓ2 norm applied after flattening the
matrix into avector. Finally, the model’sregularizedlossonagivendataexampleis:
𝐽 = 𝐿+𝑠.
We refer to 𝐽 as the objective function in the following discussion.
5.3.2 Computational Graph of Forward Propagation
(5.3.6)
Plotting computational graphs helps us visualize the dependencies of operators and vari
ables within the calculation. Fig. 5.3.1 contains the graph associated with the simple net
work described above, where squares denote variables and circles denote operators. The
lower-left corner signifies the input and the upper-right corner is the output. Notice that
the directions of the arrows (which illustrate data flow) are primarily rightward and up
ward.
Computational graph of forward propagation.
5.3.3 Backpropagation
Backpropagation refers to the method of calculating the gradient of neural network param
eters. In short, the method traverses the network in reverse order, from the output to the
input layer, according to the chain rule from calculus. The algorithm stores any interme
diate variables (partial derivatives) required while calculating the gradient with respect to
some parameters. Assume that we have functions Y = 𝑓 (X) and Z = 𝑔(Y), in which the
input and the output X,Y,Z are tensors of arbitrary shapes. By using the chain rule, we can
compute the derivative of Z with respect to X via
𝜕Z
𝜕X = prod 𝜕Z
𝜕Y , 𝜕Y
𝜕X .
(5.3.7)
Here we use the prod operator to multiply its arguments after the necessary operations,
such as transposition and swapping input positions, have been carried out. For vectors,
this is straightforward: it is simply matrix–matrix multiplication. For higher dimensional
182 MultilayerPerceptrons
tensors,weusetheappropriatecounterpart. Theoperatorprodhidesall thenotational
overhead.
Recall that theparametersofthesimplenetworkwithonehiddenlayer,whosecomputa
tionalgraphisinFig.5.3.1,areW(1) andW(2). Theobjectiveofbackpropagationisto
calculatethegradients𝜕𝐽/𝜕W(1) and𝜕𝐽/𝜕W(2).Toaccomplishthis,weapplythechain
ruleandcalculate, inturn, thegradientofeachintermediatevariableandparameter.The
orderofcalculationsarereversedrelativetothoseperformedinforwardpropagation,since
weneedtostartwiththeoutcomeofthecomputationalgraphandworkourwaytowards
theparameters.Thefirststepistocalculatethegradientsoftheobjectivefunction𝐽=𝐿+𝑠
withrespecttothelossterm𝐿andtheregularizationterm𝑠:
𝜕𝐽
𝜕𝐿 =1and 𝜕𝐽
𝜕𝑠 =1. (5.3.8)
Next,wecomputethegradientof theobjectivefunctionwithrespect tovariableof the
outputlayeroaccordingtothechainrule:
𝜕𝐽
𝜕o =prod 𝜕𝐽
𝜕𝐿 , 𝜕𝐿
𝜕o = 𝜕𝐿
𝜕o ∈R𝑞. (5.3.9)
Next,wecalculatethegradientsof theregularizationtermwithrespect tobothparame
ters:
𝜕𝑠
𝜕W(1)
=𝜆W(1) and 𝜕𝑠
𝜕W(2)
=𝜆W(2). (5.3.10)
Nowweareabletocalculatethegradient𝜕𝐽/𝜕W(2) ∈R𝑞×ℎof themodelparameters
closesttotheoutputlayer.Usingthechainruleyields:
𝜕𝐽
𝜕W(2)
=prod 𝜕𝐽
𝜕o , 𝜕o
𝜕W(2)
+prod 𝜕𝐽
𝜕𝑠 , 𝜕𝑠
𝜕W(2)
= 𝜕𝐽
𝜕oh +𝜆W(2). (5.3.11)
Toobtainthegradientwithrespect toW(1)weneedtocontinuebackpropagationalong
theoutput layertothehiddenlayer. Thegradientwithrespect tothehiddenlayeroutput
𝜕𝐽/𝜕h∈Rℎisgivenby
𝜕𝐽
𝜕h=prod 𝜕𝐽
𝜕o , 𝜕o
𝜕h =W(2) 𝜕𝐽
𝜕o . (5.3.12)
Sincetheactivationfunction𝜙applieselementwise,calculatingthegradient𝜕𝐽/𝜕z∈Rℎ
oftheintermediatevariablezrequiresthatweusetheelementwisemultiplicationoperator,
whichwedenoteby :
𝜕𝐽
𝜕z =prod 𝜕𝐽
𝜕h , 𝜕h
𝜕z = 𝜕𝐽
𝜕h 𝜙 (z). (5.3.13)
Finally,wecanobtainthegradient𝜕𝐽/𝜕W(1) ∈Rℎ×𝑑ofthemodelparametersclosestto
theinputlayer.Accordingtothechainrule,weget
𝜕𝐽
𝜕W(1)
=prod 𝜕𝐽
𝜕z , 𝜕z
𝜕W(1)
+prod 𝜕𝐽
𝜕𝑠 , 𝜕𝑠
𝜕W(1)
= 𝜕𝐽
𝜕zx +𝜆W(1). (5.3.14)
183
Forward Propagation, Backward Propagation, and Computational Graphs
5.3.4 Training Neural Networks
When training neural networks, forward and backward propagation depend on each other.
In particular, for forward propagation, we traverse the computational graph in the direc
tion of dependencies and compute all the variables on its path. These are then used for
backpropagation where the compute order on the graph is reversed.
Take the aforementioned simple network as an illustrative example. On the one hand, com
puting the regularization term (5.3.5) during forward propagation depends on the current
values of model parameters W(1) and W(2). Theyaregiven bythe optimization algorithm
according to backpropagation in the most recent iteration. On the other hand, the gradient
calculation for the parameter (5.3.11) during backpropagation depends on the current value
of the hidden layer output h, which is given by forward propagation.
Therefore when training neural networks, once model parameters are initialized, we alter
nate forward propagation with backpropagation, updating model parameters using gradi
ents given by backpropagation. Note that backpropagation reuses the stored intermediate
values from forward propagation to avoid duplicate calculations. One of the consequences
is that we need to retain the intermediate values until backpropagation is complete. This is
also one of the reasons why training requires significantly more memory than plain predic
tion. Besides, the size of such intermediate values is roughly proportional to the number of
network layers and the batch size. Thus, training deeper networks using larger batch sizes
more easily leads to out-of-memory errors.
5.3.5 Summary
Forward propagation sequentially calculates and stores intermediate variables within the
computational graph defined by the neural network. It proceeds from the input to the out
put layer. Backpropagation sequentially calculates and stores the gradients of intermediate
variables and parameters within the neural network in the reversed order. When training
deep learning models, forward propagation and backpropagation are interdependent, and
training requires significantly more memory than prediction.
5.3.6 Exercises
1. Assume that the inputs X to some scalar function 𝑓 are 𝑛 × 𝑚 matrices. What is the
dimensionality of the gradient of 𝑓 with respect to X?
2. Add a bias to the hidden layer of the model described in this section (you do not need
to include bias in the regularization term).
1. Draw the corresponding computational graph.
2. Derive the forward and backward propagation equations.
3. Computethememoryfootprintfortraining and prediction in the model described in this
section.
4. Assume that you want to compute second derivatives. What happens to the computa
tional graph? How long do you expect the calculation to take?
184 MultilayerPerceptrons
104
5. AssumethatthecomputationalgraphistoolargeforyourGPU.
1. CanyoupartitionitovermorethanoneGPU?
2.Whataretheadvantagesanddisadvantagesovertrainingonasmallerminibatch?
Discussions104.
5.4NumericalStabilityandInitialization
Thusfar,everymodelthatwehaveimplementedrequiredthatweinitializeitsparameters
accordingtosomepre-specifieddistribution.Untilnow,wetooktheinitializationscheme
forgranted,glossingoverthedetailsofhowthesechoicesaremade.Youmighthaveeven
gottentheimpressionthatthesechoicesarenotespeciallyimportant.Onthecontrary,the
choiceof initializationschemeplaysasignificant roleinneuralnetworklearning,andit
canbecrucialformaintainingnumericalstability.Moreover, thesechoicescanbetiedup
ininterestingwayswiththechoiceof thenonlinearactivationfunction.Whichfunction
wechooseandhowweinitializeparameterscandeterminehowquicklyouroptimization
algorithmconverges.Poorchoicesherecancauseustoencounterexplodingorvanishing
gradientswhiletraining. Inthissection,wedelveintothesetopicsingreaterdetailand
discusssomeusefulheuristics thatyouwillfinduseful throughoutyourcareer indeep
learning.
%matplotlibinline
importtorch
fromd2l import torchasd2l
5.4.1VanishingandExplodingGradients
Consideradeepnetworkwith𝐿layers,inputxandoutputo.Witheachlayer𝑙definedby
atransformation 𝑓𝑙 parametrizedbyweightsW(𝑙),whosehiddenlayeroutput ish(𝑙) (let
h(0)=x),ournetworkcanbeexpressedas:
h(𝑙) = 𝑓𝑙(h(𝑙−1))andthuso= 𝑓𝐿◦···◦ 𝑓1(x). (5.4.1)
Ifallthehiddenlayeroutputandtheinputarevectors,wecanwritethegradientofowith
respecttoanysetofparametersW(𝑙) asfollows:
𝜕W(𝑙)o=𝜕h(𝐿−1)h(𝐿)
M(𝐿) def=
···𝜕h(𝑙)h(𝑙+1)
M(𝑙+1) def=
𝜕W(𝑙)h(𝑙)
v(𝑙) def=
.
(5.4.2)
Inotherwords, thisgradient is theproductof𝐿−𝑙matricesM(𝐿) ···M(𝑙+1) andthe
gradientvectorv(𝑙).Thuswearesusceptibletothesameproblemsofnumericalunderflow
thatoftencropupwhenmultiplyingtogethertoomanyprobabilities.Whendealingwith
probabilities,acommontrickistoswitchintolog-space, i.e., shiftingpressurefromthe
185
Numerical Stability and Initialization
mantissa to the exponent of the numericalrepresentation. Unfortunately, ourproblemabove
is more serious: initially the matrices M(𝑙) may have a wide variety of eigenvalues. They
might be small or large, and their product might be very large or very small.
The risks posed by unstable gradients go beyond numerical representation. Gradients of
unpredictable magnitude also threaten the stability of our optimization algorithms. We may
be facing parameter updates that are either (i) excessively large, destroying our model (the
exploding gradient problem); or (ii) excessively small (the vanishing gradient problem),
rendering learning impossible as parameters hardly move on each update.
Vanishing Gradients
One frequent culprit causing the vanishing gradient problem is the choice of the activation
function 𝜎 that is appended following each layer’s linear operations. Historically, the sig
moid function 1/(1+exp(−𝑥)) (introducedinSection5.1)waspopularbecauseitresembles
a thresholding function. Since early artificial neural networks were inspired by biological
neural networks, the idea of neurons that fire either fully or not at all (like biological neu
rons) seemed appealing. Let’s take a closer look at the sigmoid to see why it can cause
vanishing gradients.
x = torch.arange(-8.0, 8.0, 0.1, requires_grad=True)
y = torch.sigmoid(x)
y.backward(torch.ones_like(x))
d2l.plot(x.detach().numpy(), [y.detach().numpy(), x.grad.numpy()],
legend=['sigmoid', 'gradient'], figsize=(4.5, 2.5))
As you can see, the sigmoid’s gradient vanishes both when its inputs are large and when
they are small. Moreover, when backpropagating through many layers, unless we are in the
Goldilocks zone, where the inputs to many of the sigmoids are close to zero, the gradients
of the overall product may vanish. When our network boasts many layers, unless we are
careful, the gradient will likely be cut off at some layer. Indeed, this problem used to plague
deep network training. Consequently, ReLUs, which are more stable (but less neurally
plausible), have emerged as the default choice for practitioners.
186
Multilayer Perceptrons
Exploding Gradients
The opposite problem, when gradients explode, can be similarly vexing. To illustrate this
a bit better, we draw 100 Gaussian random matrices and multiply them with some initial
matrix. For the scale that we picked (the choice of the variance 𝜎2 = 1), the matrix product
explodes. When this happens because of the initialization of a deep network, we have no
chance of getting a gradient descent optimizer to converge.
M = torch.normal(0, 1, size=(4, 4))
print('a single matrix \n',M)
for i in range(100):
M = M @ torch.normal(0, 1, size=(4, 4))
print('after multiplying 100 matrices\n', M)
a single matrix
tensor([[-0.8755,-1.2171, 1.3316, 0.1357],
[ 0.4399, 1.4073,-1.9131,-0.4608],
[-2.1420, 0.3643,-0.5267, 1.0277],
[-0.1734,-0.7549, 2.3024, 1.3085]])
after multiplying 100 matrices
tensor([[-2.9185e+23, 1.3915e+25,-1.1865e+25, 1.4354e+24],
[ 4.9142e+23,-2.3430e+25, 1.9979e+25,-2.4169e+24],
[ 2.6578e+23,-1.2672e+25, 1.0805e+25,-1.3072e+24],
[-5.2223e+23, 2.4899e+25,-2.1231e+25, 2.5684e+24]])
Breaking the Symmetry
Another problem in neural network design is the symmetry inherent in their parametriza
tion. Assume that we have a simple MLP with one hidden layer and two units. In this case,
we could permute the weights W(1) of the first layer and likewise permute the weights of
the output layer to obtain the same function. There is nothing special differentiating the
first and second hidden units. In other words, we have permutation symmetry among the
hidden units of each layer.
This is more than just a theoretical nuisance. Consider the aforementioned one-hidden
layer MLP with two hidden units. For illustration, suppose that the output layer transforms
the two hidden units into only one output unit. Imagine what would happen if we initialized
all the parameters of the hidden layer as W(1) = 𝑐 for some constant 𝑐. In this case, during
forward propagation either hidden unit takes the same inputs and parameters producing the
same activation which is fed to the output unit. During backpropagation, differentiating the
output unit with respect to parameters W(1) gives a gradient all of whose elements take
the same value. Thus, after gradient-based iteration (e.g., minibatch stochastic gradient de
scent), all the elements of W(1) still take the same value. Such iterations would never break
the symmetry on their own and we might never be able to realize the network’s expressive
power. The hidden layer would behave as if it had only a single unit. Note that while mini
batch stochastic gradient descent would not break this symmetry, dropout regularization
(to be introduced later) would!
187
Numerical Stability and Initialization
5.4.2 Parameter Initialization
One way of addressing—or at least mitigating—the issues raised above is through care
ful initialization. As we will see later, additional care during optimization and suitable
regularization can further enhance stability.
Default Initialization
In the previous sections, e.g., in Section 3.5, we used a normal distribution to initialize the
values of our weights. If we do not specify the initialization method, the framework will
use a default random initialization method, which often works well in practice for moderate
problem sizes.
Xavier Initialization
Let’s look at the scale distribution of an output 𝑜𝑖 for some fully connected layer without
nonlinearities. With 𝑛in inputs 𝑥𝑗 and their associated weights 𝑤𝑖𝑗 for this layer, an output
is given by
𝑛in
𝑜𝑖 =
𝑗=1
𝑤𝑖𝑗𝑥𝑗.
(5.4.3)
Theweights 𝑤𝑖𝑗 are all drawn independently from the same distribution. Furthermore, let’s
assume that this distribution has zero mean and variance 𝜎2. Note that this does not mean
that the distribution has to be Gaussian, just that the mean and variance need to exist. For
now, let’s assume that the inputs to the layer 𝑥𝑗 also have zero meanandvariance 𝛾2 andthat
they are independent of 𝑤𝑖𝑗 and independent of each other. In this case, we can compute
the mean of 𝑜𝑖:
𝑛in
𝐸[𝑜𝑖] =
=
𝑗=1
𝑛in
𝑗=1
= 0,
and the variance:
𝐸[𝑤𝑖𝑗𝑥𝑗]
𝐸[𝑤𝑖𝑗]𝐸[𝑥𝑗]
Var[𝑜𝑖] = 𝐸[𝑜2
𝑖] − (𝐸[𝑜𝑖])2
𝑛in
=
=
𝑗=1
𝑛in
𝑗=1
𝐸[𝑤2
𝑖𝑗𝑥2
𝑗] − 0
𝐸[𝑤2
𝑖𝑗]𝐸[𝑥2
𝑗]
= 𝑛in𝜎2𝛾2.
(5.4.4)
(5.4.5)
One way to keep the variance fixed is to set 𝑛in𝜎2 = 1. Now consider backpropagation.
There we face a similar problem, albeit with gradients being propagated from the layers
188 MultilayerPerceptrons
closertotheoutput.Usingthesamereasoningasforforwardpropagation,weseethatthe
gradients’variancecanblowupunless𝑛out𝜎2 =1,where𝑛out isthenumberofoutputs
of this layer. This leavesus inadilemma: wecannotpossiblysatisfybothconditions
simultaneously. Instead,wesimplytrytosatisfy:
1
2 (𝑛in+𝑛out)𝜎2=1orequivalently𝜎= 2
𝑛in+𝑛out
. (5.4.6)
Thisisthereasoningunderlyingthenow-standardandpracticallybeneficialXavierinitial
ization,namedafterthefirstauthorofitscreators(GlorotandBengio,2010).Typically,the
XavierinitializationsamplesweightsfromaGaussiandistributionwithzeromeanandvari
ance𝜎2= 2
𝑛in+𝑛out
.Wecanalsoadaptthistochoosethevariancewhensamplingweights
fromauniformdistribution.Notethattheuniformdistribution𝑈(−𝑎,𝑎)hasvariance 𝑎2
3 .
Plugging𝑎2
3 intoourconditionon𝜎2promptsustoinitializeaccordingto
𝑈− 6
𝑛in+𝑛out
, 6
𝑛in+𝑛out
. (5.4.7)
Thoughtheassumptionfornonexistenceofnonlinearitiesintheabovemathematicalrea
soningcanbeeasilyviolatedinneuralnetworks,theXavierinitializationmethodturnsout
toworkwellinpractice.
Beyond
Thereasoningabovebarelyscratchesthesurfaceofmodernapproachestoparameterini
tialization.Adeeplearningframeworkoftenimplementsoveradozendifferentheuristics.
Moreover,parameter initializationcontinuestobeahotareaoffundamental researchin
deeplearning.Amongtheseareheuristicsspecializedfortied(shared)parameters,super
resolution,sequencemodels,andothersituations.Forinstance,Xiaoetal. (2018)demon
stratedthepossibilityoftraining10,000-layerneuralnetworkswithoutarchitecturaltricks
byusingacarefully-designedinitializationmethod.
Ifthetopicinterestsyouwesuggestadeepdiveintothismodule’sofferings, readingthe
papersthatproposedandanalyzedeachheuristic,andthenexploringthelatestpublications
onthetopic. Perhapsyouwillstumbleacrossoreveninventacleverideaandcontribute
animplementationtodeeplearningframeworks.
5.4.3Summary
Vanishingandexplodinggradientsarecommonissues indeepnetworks. Greatcarein
parameter initializationis requiredtoensure thatgradientsandparameters remainwell
controlled. Initializationheuristicsareneededtoensurethattheinitialgradientsareneither
toolargenortoosmall.Randominitializationiskeytoensuringthatsymmetryisbroken
beforeoptimization. Xavier initializationsuggests that, foreachlayer, varianceofany
outputisnotaffectedbythenumberofinputs,andvarianceofanygradientisnotaffectedby
thenumberofoutputs.ReLUactivationfunctionsmitigatethevanishinggradientproblem.
Thiscanaccelerateconvergence.
189
Generalization in Deep Learning
105
5.4.4 Exercises
1. Can you design other cases where a neural network might exhibit symmetry that needs
breaking, besides the permutation symmetry in an MLP’s layers?
2. Can we initialize all weight parameters in linear regression or in softmax regression to
the same value?
3. Look up analytic bounds on the eigenvalues of the product of two matrices. What does
this tell you about ensuring that gradients are well conditioned?
4. If we know that some terms diverge, can we fix this after the fact? Look at the paper on
layerwise adaptive rate scaling for inspiration (You et al., 2017).
Discussions105.
5.5 Generalization in Deep Learning
In Chapter 3 and Chapter 4, we tackled regression and classification problems by fitting
linear models to training data. In both cases, we provided practical algorithms for finding
the parameters that maximized the likelihood of the observed training labels. And then,
towards the end of each chapter, we recalled that fitting the training data was only an in
termediate goal. Our real quest all along was to discover general patterns on the basis
of which we can make accurate predictions even on new examples drawn from the same
underlying population. Machine learning researchers are consumers of optimization algo
rithms. Sometimes, we must even develop new optimization algorithms. But at the end
of the day, optimization is merely a means to an end. At its core, machine learning is a
statistical discipline and we wish to optimize training loss only insofar as some statistical
principle (known or unknown) leads the resulting models to generalize beyond the training
set.
On the bright side, it turns out that deep neural networks trained by stochastic gradient de
scent generalize remarkably well across myriad prediction problems, spanning computer
vision; natural language processing; time series data; recommender systems; electronic
health records; protein folding; value function approximation in video games and board
games; and numerous other domains. On the downside, if you were looking for a straight
forward account of either the optimization story (why we can fit them to training data) or
the generalization story (why the resulting models generalize to unseen examples), then you
might want to pour yourself a drink. While our procedures for optimizing linear models
and the statistical properties of the solutions are both described well by a comprehensive
body of theory, our understanding of deep learning still resembles the wild west on both
fronts.
Both the theory and practice of deep learning are rapidly evolving, with theorists adopting
new strategies to explain what’s going on, even as practitioners continue to innovate at
190
Multilayer Perceptrons
a blistering pace, building arsenals of heuristics for training deep networks and a body of
intuitions and folk knowledge that provide guidance for deciding which techniques to apply
in which situations.
The summary of the present moment is that the theory of deep learning has produced
promising lines of attack and scattered fascinating results, but still appears far from a com
prehensive account of both (i) why we are able to optimize neural networks and (ii) how
models learned bygradient descent manage to generalize so well, evenonhigh-dimensional
tasks. However, inpractice, (i) is seldom a problem(wecanalwaysfindparametersthatwill
fit all of our training data) and thus understanding generalization is far the bigger problem.
On the other hand, even absent the comfort of a coherent scientific theory, practitioners
have developed a large collection of techniques that may help you to produce models that
generalize well in practice. While no pithy summary can possibly do justice to the vast
topic of generalization in deep learning, and while the overall state of research is far from
resolved, we hope, in this section, to present a broad overview of the state of research and
practice.
5.5.1 Revisiting Overfitting and Regularization
According to the “no free lunch” theorem of Wolpert and Macready (1995), any learn
ing algorithm generalizes better on data with certain distributions, and worse with other
distributions. Thus, given a finite training set, a model relies on certain assumptions: to
achieve human-level performance it may be useful to identify inductive biases that reflect
how humans think about the world. Such inductive biases show preferences for solutions
with certain properties. For example, a deep MLP has an inductive bias towards building
up a complicated function by the composition of simpler functions.
With machine learning models encoding inductive biases, our approach to training them
typically consists of two phases: (i) fit the training data; and (ii) estimate the generalization
error (the true error on the underlying population) by evaluating the model on holdout data.
The difference between our fit on the training data and our fit on the test data is called the
generalization gap and when this is large, we say that our models overfit to the training data.
In extreme cases of overfitting, we might exactly fit the training data, even when the test
error remains significant. And in the classical view, the interpretation is that our models are
too complex, requiring that we either shrink the number of features, the number of nonzero
parameters learned, or the size of the parameters as quantified. Recall the plot of model
complexity compared with loss (Fig. 3.6.1) from Section 3.6.
However deep learning complicates this picture in counterintuitive ways. First, for classifi
cation problems, our models are typically expressive enough to perfectly fit every training
example, even in datasets consisting of millions (Zhang et al., 2021). In the classical pic
ture, we might think that this setting lies on the far right extreme of the model complexity
axis, and that any improvements in generalization error must come by way of regulariza
tion, either by reducing the complexity of the model class, or byapplying apenalty, severely
constraining the set of values that our parameters might take. But that is where things start
to get weird.
191
Generalization in Deep Learning
Strangely, for many deep learning tasks (e.g., image recognition and text classification) we
are typically choosing among model architectures, all of which can achieve arbitrarily low
training loss (and zero training error). Because all models under consideration achieve
zero training error, the only avenue for further gains is to reduce overfitting. Even stranger,
it is often the case that despite fitting the training data perfectly, we can actually reduce
the generalization error further by making the model even more expressive, e.g., adding
layers, nodes, or training for a larger number of epochs. Stranger yet, the pattern relating
the generalization gap to the complexity of the model (as captured, for example, in the depth
or width of the networks) can be non-monotonic, with greater complexity hurting at first
but subsequently helping in a so-called “double-descent” pattern (Nakkiran et al., 2021).
Thus the deep learning practitioner possesses a bag of tricks, some of which seemingly
restrict the model in some fashion and others that seemingly make it even more expressive,
and all of which, in some sense, are applied to mitigate overfitting.
Complicating things even further, while the guarantees provided by classical learning the
ory can be conservative even for classical models, they appear powerless to explain why
it is that deep neural networks generalize in the first place. Because deep neural networks
are capable of fitting arbitrary labels even for large datasets, and despite the use of famil
iar methods such as ℓ2 regularization, traditional complexity-based generalization bounds,
e.g., those based on the VC dimension or Rademacher complexity of a hypothesis class
cannot explain why neural networks generalize.
5.5.2 Inspiration from Nonparametrics
Approaching deep learning for the first time, it is tempting to think of them as parametric
models. After all, the models do have millions of parameters. When we update the models,
we update their parameters. When we save the models, we write their parameters to disk.
However, mathematics and computer science are riddled with counterintuitive changes of
perspective, and surprising isomorphisms between seemingly different problems. While
neural networks clearly have parameters, in some ways it can be more fruitful to think of
them as behaving like nonparametric models. So what precisely makes a model nonpara
metric? While the name covers a diverse set of approaches, one common theme is that
nonparametric methods tend to have a level of complexity that grows as the amount of
available data grows.
Perhaps the simplest example of a nonparametric model is the 𝑘-nearest neighbor algorithm
(we will cover more nonparametric models later, for example in Section 11.2). Here, at
training time, the learner simply memorizes the dataset. Then, at prediction time, when
confronted with a new point x, the learner looks up the 𝑘 nearest neighbors (the 𝑘 points
x
𝑖 that minimize some distance 𝑑(x,x𝑖)). When 𝑘 = 1, this algorithm is called 1-nearest
neighbors, and the algorithm will always achieve a training error of zero. That however,
does not mean that the algorithm will not generalize. In fact, it turns out that under some
mild conditions, the 1-nearest neighbor algorithm is consistent (eventually converging to
the optimal predictor).
Note that 1-nearest neighbor requires that we specify some distance function 𝑑, or equiva
lently, that we specify some vector-valued basis function 𝜙(x) for featurizing our data. For
192
Multilayer Perceptrons
any choice of the distance metric, we will achieve zero training error and eventually reach
an optimal predictor, but different distance metrics 𝑑 encode different inductive biases and
with a finite amount of available data will yield different predictors. Different choices of
the distance metric 𝑑 represent different assumptions about the underlying patterns and the
performance of the different predictors will depend on how compatible the assumptions are
with the observed data.
In a sense, because neural networks are over-parametrized, possessing many more parame
ters than are needed to fit the training data, they tend to interpolate the training data (fitting
it perfectly) and thus behave, in some ways, more like nonparametric models. More re
cent theoretical research has established deep connection between large neural networks
and nonparametric methods, notably kernel methods. In particular, Jacot et al. (2018)
demonstrated that in the limit, as multilayer perceptrons with randomly initialized weights
grow infinitely wide, they become equivalent to (nonparametric) kernel methods for a spe
cific choice of the kernel function (essentially, a distance function), which they call the
neural tangent kernel. While current neural tangent kernel models may not fully explain
the behavior of modern deep networks, their success as an analytical tool underscores the
usefulness of nonparametric modeling for understanding the behavior of over-parametrized
deep networks.
5.5.3 Early Stopping
While deep neural networks are capable of fitting arbitrary labels, even when labels are
assigned incorrectly or randomly (Zhang et al., 2021), this capability only emerges over
many iterations of training. A new line of work (Rolnick et al., 2017) has revealed that
in the setting of label noise, neural networks tend to fit cleanly labeled data first and only
subsequently to interpolate the mislabeled data. Moreover, it has been established that this
phenomenon translates directly into a guarantee on generalization: whenever a model has
fitted the cleanly labeled data but not randomly labeled examples included in the training
set, it has in fact generalized (Garg et al., 2021).
Together these findings help to motivate early stopping, a classic technique for regularizing
deep neural networks. Here, rather than directly constraining the values of the weights, one
constrains the number of epochs of training. The most common way to determine the
stopping criterion is to monitor validation error throughout training (typically by checking
once after each epoch) and to cut off training when the validation error has not decreased
by more than some small amount 𝜖 for some number of epochs. This is sometimes called a
patience criterion. As well as the potential to lead to better generalization in the setting of
noisy labels, another benefit of early stopping is the time saved. Once the patience criterion
is met, one can terminate training. For large models that might require days of training
simultaneously across eight or more GPUs, well-tuned early stopping can save researchers
days of time and can save their employers many thousands of dollars.
Notably, when there is no label noise and datasets are realizable (the classes are truly sep
arable, e.g., distinguishing cats from dogs), early stopping tends not to lead to significant
improvements in generalization. On the other hand, when there is label noise, or intrinsic
193
Generalization in Deep Learning
variability in the label (e.g., predicting mortality among patients), early stopping is crucial.
Training models until they interpolate noisy data is typically a bad idea.
5.5.4 Classical Regularization Methods for Deep Networks
In Chapter 3, we described several classical regularization techniques for constraining the
complexity of our models. In particular, Section 3.7 introduced a method called weight
decay, whichconsistsofaddingaregularizationtermtothelossfunctioninordertopenalize
large values of the weights. Depending on which weight norm is penalized this technique
is known either as ridge regularization (for ℓ2 penalty) or lasso regularization (for an ℓ1
penalty). In the classical analysis of these regularizers, they are considered as sufficiently
restrictive on the values that the weights can take to prevent the model from fitting arbitrary
labels.
In deep learning implementations, weight decay remains a popular tool. However, re
searchers have noted that typical strengths of ℓ2 regularization are insufficient to prevent the
networks from interpolating the data (Zhang et al., 2021) and thus the benefits if interpreted
as regularization might only make sense in combination with the early stopping criterion.
Absent early stopping, it is possible that just like the number of layers or number of nodes
(in deep learning) or the distance metric (in 1-nearest neighbor), these methods may lead to
better generalization not because they meaningfully constrain the power of the neural net
work but rather because they somehow encode inductive biases that are better compatible
with the patterns found in datasets of interests. Thus, classical regularizers remain popular
in deep learning implementations, even if the theoretical rationale for their efficacy may be
radically different.
Notably, deep learning researchers have also built on techniques first popularized in classi
cal regularization contexts, such as adding noise to model inputs. In the next section we will
introduce the famous dropout technique (invented by Srivastava et al. (2014)), which has
become a mainstay of deep learning, even as the theoretical basis for its efficacy remains
similarly mysterious.
5.5.5 Summary
Unlike classical linear models, which tend to have fewer parameters than examples, deep
networks tend to be over-parametrized, and for most tasks are capable of perfectly fitting
the training set. This interpolation regime challenges many hard fast-held intuitions. Func
tionally, neural networks look like parametric models. But thinking of them as nonpara
metric models can sometimes be a more reliable source of intuition. Because it is often
the case that all deep networks under consideration are capable of fitting all of the train
ing labels, nearly all gains must come by mitigating overfitting (closing the generalization
gap). Paradoxically, the interventions that reduce the generalization gap sometimes appear
to increase model complexity and at other times appear to decrease complexity. However,
these methods seldom decrease complexity sufficiently for classical theory to explain the
generalization of deep networks, and why certain choices lead to improved generalization
remains for the most part a massive open question despite the concerted efforts of many
brilliant researchers.
194
Multilayer Perceptrons
106
5.5.6 Exercises
1. Inwhatsensedotraditionalcomplexity-basedmeasuresfailtoaccountforgeneralization
of deep neural networks?
2. Whymight early stopping be considered a regularization technique?
3. Howdoresearchers typically determine the stopping criterion?
4. What important factor seems to differentiate cases when early stopping leads to big
improvements in generalization?
5. Beyond generalization, describe another benefit of early stopping.
Discussions106.
5.6 Dropout
Let’s think briefly about what we expect from a good predictive model. We want it to pe
form well on unseen data. Classical generalization theory suggests that to close the gap
between train and test performance, we should aim for a simple model. Simplicity can
come in the form of a small number of dimensions. We explored this when discussing the
monomial basis functions of linear models in Section 3.6. Additionally, as we saw when
discussing weight decay (ℓ2 regularization) in Section 3.7, the (inverse) norm of the param
eters also represents a useful measure of simplicity. Another useful notion of simplicity
is smoothness, i.e., that the function should not be sensitive to small changes to its inputs.
For instance, when we classify images, we would expect that adding some random noise to
the pixels should be mostly harmless.
Bishop (1995) formalized this idea when he proved that training with input noise is equiva
lent to Tikhonov regularization. This work drew a clear mathematical connection between
the requirement that a function be smooth (and thus simple), and the requirement that it be
resilient to perturbations in the input.
Then, Srivastava et al. (2014) developed a clever idea for how to apply Bishop’s idea to the
internal layers of a network, too. Their idea, called dropout, involves injecting noise while
computing each internal layer during forward propagation, and it has become a standard
technique for training neural networks. The method is called dropout because we literally
drop out some neurons during training. Throughout training, on each iteration, standard
dropout consists of zeroing out some fraction of the nodes in each layer before calculating
the subsequent layer.
To be clear, we are imposing our own narrative with the link to Bishop. The original pa
per on dropout offers intuition through a surprising analogy to sexual reproduction. The
authors argue that neural network overfitting is characterized by a state in which each layer
195
Dropout
relies on a specific pattern of activations in the previous layer, calling this condition co
adaptation. Dropout, they claim, breaks up co-adaptation just as sexual reproduction is
argued to break up co-adapted genes. While such an justification of this theory is cer
tainly up for debate, the dropout technique itself has proved enduring, and various forms of
dropout are implemented in most deep learning libraries.
The key challenge is how to inject this noise. One idea is to inject it in an unbiased manner
so that the expected value of each layer—while fixing the others—equals the value it would
have taken absent noise. In Bishop’s work, he added Gaussian noise to the inputs to a linear
model. At each training iteration, he added noise sampled from a distribution with mean
zero 𝜖 ∼ N(0,𝜎2) to the input x, yielding a perturbed point x = x + 𝜖. In expectation,
𝐸[x] = x.
In standard dropout regularization, one zeros out some fraction of the nodes in each layer
and then debiases each layer by normalizing by the fraction of nodes that were retained (not
dropped out). In other words, with dropout probability 𝑝, each intermediate activation ℎ is
replaced by a random variable ℎ as follows:
ℎ = 0 with probability 𝑝
ℎ
1−𝑝
otherwise
By design, the expectation remains unchanged, i.e., 𝐸[ℎ] = ℎ.
import torch
from torch import nn
from d2l import torch as d2l
(5.6.1)
5.6.1 Dropout in Practice
Recall the MLP with a hidden layer and five hidden units from Fig. 5.1.1. When we apply
dropout to a hidden layer, zeroing out each hidden unit with probability 𝑝, the result can
be viewed as a network containing only a subset of the original neurons. In Fig. 5.6.1, ℎ2
and ℎ5 are removed. Consequently, the calculation of the outputs no longer depends on ℎ2
or ℎ5 and their respective gradient also vanishes when performing backpropagation. In this
way, the calculation of the output layer cannot be overly dependent on any one element of
ℎ1, . . . , ℎ5.
Fig. 5.6.1
MLP before and after dropout.
196
Multilayer Perceptrons
Typically, we disable dropout at test time. Given a trained model and a new example,
we do not drop out any nodes and thus do not need to normalize. However, there are
some exceptions: some researchers use dropout at test time as a heuristic for estimating the
uncertainty of neural network predictions: if the predictions agree across many different
dropout outputs, then we might say that the network is more confident.
5.6.2 Implementation from Scratch
To implement the dropout function for a single layer, we must draw as many samples from a
Bernoulli (binary) random variable as our layer has dimensions, where the random variable
takes value 1 (keep) with probability 1 − 𝑝 and 0 (drop) with probability 𝑝. One easy way
to implement this is to first draw samples from the uniform distribution 𝑈[0,1]. Then we
can keep those nodes for which the corresponding sample is greater than 𝑝, dropping the
rest.
In the following code, weimplementadropout_layerfunctionthatdropsouttheelements
in the tensor input X with probability dropout, rescaling the remainder as described above:
dividing the survivors by 1.0-dropout.
def dropout_layer(X, dropout):
assert 0 <= dropout <= 1
if dropout == 1: return torch.zeros_like(X)
mask = (torch.rand(X.shape) > dropout).float()
return mask * X / (1.0- dropout)
We can test out the dropout_layer function on a few examples. In the following lines of
code, we pass our input X through the dropout operation, with probabilities 0, 0.5, and 1,
respectively.
X = torch.arange(16, dtype = torch.float32).reshape((2, 8))
print('dropout_p = 0:', dropout_layer(X, 0))
print('dropout_p = 0.5:', dropout_layer(X, 0.5))
print('dropout_p = 1:', dropout_layer(X, 1))
dropout_p = 0: tensor([[ 0., 1., 2., 3., 4., 5., 6., 7.],
[ 8., 9., 10., 11., 12., 13., 14., 15.]])
dropout_p = 0.5: tensor([[ 0., 2., 0., 6., 8., 0., 0., 0.],
[16., 18., 20., 22., 24., 26., 28., 30.]])
dropout_p = 1: tensor([[0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0., 0.]])
Defining the Model
Themodelbelow appliesdropout to theoutput ofeachhidden layer(following the activation
function). We can set dropout probabilities for each layer separately. A common choice is
to set a lower dropout probability closer to the input layer. We ensure that dropout is only
active during training.
197
Dropout
class DropoutMLPScratch(d2l.Classifier):
def __init__(self, num_outputs, num_hiddens_1, num_hiddens_2,
dropout_1, dropout_2, lr):
super().__init__()
self.save_hyperparameters()
self.lin1 = nn.LazyLinear(num_hiddens_1)
self.lin2 = nn.LazyLinear(num_hiddens_2)
self.lin3 = nn.LazyLinear(num_outputs)
self.relu = nn.ReLU()
def forward(self, X):
H1 = self.relu(self.lin1(X.reshape((X.shape[0],-1))))
if self.training:
H1 = dropout_layer(H1, self.dropout_1)
H2 = self.relu(self.lin2(H1))
if self.training:
H2 = dropout_layer(H2, self.dropout_2)
return self.lin3(H2)
Training
The following is similar to the training of MLPs described previously.
hparams = {'num_outputs':10, 'num_hiddens_1':256, 'num_hiddens_2':256,
'dropout_1':0.5, 'dropout_2':0.5, 'lr':0.1}
model = DropoutMLPScratch(**hparams)
data = d2l.FashionMNIST(batch_size=256)
trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10)
trainer.fit(model, data)
5.6.3 Concise Implementation
With high-level APIs, all we need to do is add a Dropout layer after each fully connected
layer, passing in the dropout probability as the only argument to its constructor. During
training, the Dropout layer will randomly drop out outputs of the previous layer (or equiv
alently, the inputs to the subsequent layer) according to the specified dropout probability.
When not in training mode, the Dropout layer simply passes the data through during test
ing.
198
Multilayer Perceptrons
class DropoutMLP(d2l.Classifier):
def __init__(self, num_outputs, num_hiddens_1, num_hiddens_2,
dropout_1, dropout_2, lr):
super().__init__()
self.save_hyperparameters()
self.net = nn.Sequential(
nn.Flatten(), nn.LazyLinear(num_hiddens_1), nn.ReLU(),
nn.Dropout(dropout_1), nn.LazyLinear(num_hiddens_2), nn.ReLU(),
nn.Dropout(dropout_2), nn.LazyLinear(num_outputs))
Next, we train the model.
model = DropoutMLP(**hparams)
trainer.fit(model, data)
5.6.4 Summary
Beyond controlling the number of dimensions and the size of the weight vector, dropout is
yet another tool for avoiding overfitting. Often tools are used jointly. Note that dropout is
used only during training: it replaces an activation ℎ with a random variable with expected
value ℎ.
5.6.5 Exercises
1. What happens if you change the dropout probabilities for the first and second layers?
In particular, what happens if you switch the ones for both layers? Design an experi
ment to answer these questions, describe your results quantitatively, and summarize the
qualitative takeaways.
2. Increase the number of epochs and compare the results obtained when using dropout
with those when not using it.
3. What is the variance of the activations in each hidden layer when dropout is and is not
applied? Draw a plot to show how this quantity evolves over time for both models.
4. Whyis dropout not typically used at test time?
5. Using the model in this section as an example, compare the effects of using dropout and
199
Predicting House Prices on Kaggle
107
weight decay. What happens when dropout and weight decay are used at the same time?
Are the results additive? Are there diminished returns (or worse)? Do they cancel each
other out?
6. What happens if we apply dropout to the individual weights of the weight matrix rather
than the activations?
7. Invent another technique for injecting random noise at each layer that is different from
the standard dropout technique. Can you develop a method that outperforms dropout on
the Fashion-MNIST dataset (for a fixed architecture)?
Discussions107.
5.7 Predicting House Prices on Kaggle
108
Now that we have introduced some basic tools for building and training deep networks and
regularizing them with techniques including weight decay and dropout, we are ready to
put all this knowledge into practice by participating in a Kaggle competition. The house
price prediction competition is a great place to start. The data is fairly generic and do not
exhibit exotic structure that might require specialized models (as audio or video might).
This dataset, collected by De Cock (2011), covers house prices in Ames, Iowa from the
period 2006–2010. It is considerably larger than the famous Boston housing dataset108 of
Harrison and Rubinfeld (1978), boasting both more examples and more features.
In this section, we will walk you through details of data preprocessing, model design, and
hyperparameter selection. We hope that through a hands-on approach, you will gain some
intuitions that will guide you in your career as a data scientist.
%matplotlib inline
import pandas as pd
import torch
from torch import nn
from d2l import torch as d2l
5.7.1 Downloading Data
Throughout the book, we will train and test models on various downloaded datasets. Here,
we implement two utility functions for downloading and extracting zip or tar files. Again,
we skip implementation details of such utility functions.
def download(url, folder, sha1_hash=None):
"""Download a file to folder and return the local filepath."""
def extract(filename, folder):
"""Extract a zip/tar file into folder."""
200
Multilayer Perceptrons
109
Fig. 5.7.1
Fig. 5.7.2
5.7.2 Kaggle
Kaggle109 is a popular platform that hosts machine learning competitions. Each com
petition centers on a dataset and many are sponsored by stakeholders who offer prizes to
the winning solutions. The platform helps users to interact via forums and shared code,
fostering both collaboration and competition. While leaderboard chasing often spirals out
of control, with researchers focusing myopically on preprocessing steps rather than asking
fundamental questions, there is also tremendous value in the objectivity of a platform that
facilitates direct quantitative comparisons among competing approaches as well as code
sharing so that everyone can learn what did and did not work. If you want to participate in
a Kaggle competition, you will first need to register for an account (see Fig. 5.7.1).
The Kaggle website.
On the house price prediction competition page, as illustrated in Fig. 5.7.2, you can find
the dataset (under the “Data” tab), submit predictions, and see your ranking, The URL is
right here:
https://www.kaggle.com/c/house-prices-advanced-regression-techniques
The house price prediction competition page.
5.7.3 Accessing and Reading the Dataset
201
Predicting House Prices on Kaggle
Note that the competition data is separated into training and test sets. Each record includes
the property value of the house and attributes such as street type, year of construction, roof
type, basement condition, etc. The features consist of various data types. For example,
the year of construction is represented by an integer, the roof type by discrete categorical
assignments, and other features by floating point numbers. And here is where reality com
plicates things: for some examples, some data is altogether missing with the missing value
marked simply as “na”. The price of each house is included for the training set only (it is
a competition after all). We will want to partition the training set to create a validation set,
but we only get to evaluate our models on the official test set after uploading predictions to
Kaggle. The “Data” tab on the competition tab in Fig. 5.7.2 has links for downloading the
data.
To get started, we will read in and process the data using pandas, which we introduced
in Section 2.2. For convenience, we can download and cache the Kaggle housing dataset.
If a file corresponding to this dataset already exists in the cache directory and its SHA-1
matches sha1_hash, our code will use the cached file to avoid clogging up your Internet
with redundant downloads.
class KaggleHouse(d2l.DataModule):
def __init__(self, batch_size, train=None, val=None):
super().__init__()
self.save_hyperparameters()
if self.train is None:
self.raw_train = pd.read_csv(d2l.download(
d2l.DATA_URL + 'kaggle_house_pred_train.csv', self.root,
sha1_hash='585e9cc93e70b39160e7921475f9bcd7d31219ce'))
self.raw_val = pd.read_csv(d2l.download(
d2l.DATA_URL + 'kaggle_house_pred_test.csv', self.root,
sha1_hash='fa19780a7b011d9b009e8bff8e99922a8ee2eb90'))
The training dataset includes 1460 examples, 80features, andonelabel, whilethevalidation
data contains 1459 examples and 80 features.
data = KaggleHouse(batch_size=64)
print(data.raw_train.shape)
print(data.raw_val.shape)
Downloading ../data/kaggle_house_pred_train.csv from http://d2l-data.s3
↩→accelerate.amazonaws.com/kaggle_house_pred_train.csv...
Downloading ../data/kaggle_house_pred_test.csv from http://d2l-data.s3
↩→accelerate.amazonaws.com/kaggle_house_pred_test.csv...
(1460, 81)
(1459, 80)
5.7.4 Data Preprocessing
Let’s take a look at the first four and final two features as well as the label (SalePrice) from
the first four examples.
202
Multilayer Perceptrons
print(data.raw_train.iloc[:4, [0, 1, 2, 3,-3,-2,-1]])
60
Id MSSubClass MSZoning LotFrontage SaleType SaleCondition SalePrice
0 1
RL
1 2
2 3
3 4
20
60
RL
RL
65.0
80.0
WD
Normal
WD
68.0
70
RL
60.0
WD
WD
Normal
Normal
Abnorml
208500
181500
223500
140000
We can see that in each example, the first feature is the identifier. This helps the model
determineeach training example. Whilethisisconvenient, itdoesnotcarryanyinformation
for prediction purposes. Hence, we will remove it from the dataset before feeding the data
into the model. Furthermore, given a wide variety of data types, we will need to preprocess
the data before we can start modeling.
Let’s start with the numerical features. First, we apply a heuristic, replacing all missing
values by the corresponding feature’s mean. Then, to put all features on a common scale,
we standardize the data by rescaling features to zero mean and unit variance:
𝑥 ← 𝑥−𝜇
𝜎 ,
(5.7.1)
where 𝜇 and 𝜎 denote mean and standard deviation, respectively. To verify that this indeed
transforms our feature (variable) such that it has zero mean and unit variance, note that
𝐸[𝑥−𝜇
𝜎 ] = 𝜇−𝜇
𝜎 = 0 and that 𝐸[(𝑥 − 𝜇)2] = (𝜎2 + 𝜇2) − 2𝜇2 + 𝜇2 = 𝜎2. Intuitively, we
standardize the data for two reasons. First, it proves convenient for optimization. Second,
because we do not knowa priori whichfeatures will be relevant, we do not want to penalize
coefficients assigned to one feature more than any other.
Next we deal with discrete values. These include features such as “MSZoning”. Wereplace
them by a one-hot encoding in the same way that we earlier transformed multiclass labels
into vectors (see Section 4.1.1). For instance, “MSZoning” assumes the values “RL” and
“RM”. Dropping the “MSZoning” feature, two new indicator features “MSZoning_RL”
and “MSZoning_RM” are created with values being either 0 or 1. According to one-hot
encoding, if the original value of “MSZoning” is “RL”, then “MSZoning_RL” is 1 and
“MSZoning_RM” is 0. The pandas package does this automatically for us.
@d2l.add_to_class(KaggleHouse)
def preprocess(self):
# Remove the ID and label columns
label = 'SalePrice'
features = pd.concat(
(self.raw_train.drop(columns=['Id', label]),
self.raw_val.drop(columns=['Id'])))
# Standardize numerical columns
numeric_features = features.dtypes[features.dtypes!='object'].index
features[numeric_features] = features[numeric_features].apply(
lambda x: (x- x.mean()) / (x.std()))
# Replace NAN numerical features by 0
features[numeric_features] = features[numeric_features].fillna(0)
(continues on next page)
203
Predicting House Prices on Kaggle
(continued from previous page)
# Replace discrete features by one-hot encoding
features = pd.get_dummies(features, dummy_na=True)
# Save preprocessed features
self.train = features[:self.raw_train.shape[0]].copy()
self.train[label] = self.raw_train[label]
self.val = features[self.raw_train.shape[0]:].copy()
You can see that this conversion increases the number of features from 79 to 331 (excluding
ID and label columns).
data.preprocess()
data.train.shape
(1460, 331)
5.7.5 Error Measure
To get started we will train a linear model with squared loss. Not surprisingly, our linear
model will not lead to a competition-winning submission but it does provide a sanity check
to see whether there is meaningful information in the data. If we cannot do better than
random guessing here, then there might be a good chance that we have a data processing
bug. And if things work, the linear model will serve as a baseline giving us some intuition
about how close the simple model gets to the best reported models, giving us a sense of
how much gain we should expect from fancier models.
With house prices, as with stock prices, we care about relative quantities more than ab
solute quantities. Thus we tend to care more about the relative error 𝑦−ˆ𝑦
𝑦 than about the
absolute error 𝑦 − ˆ𝑦. For instance, if our prediction is off by $100,000 when estimating the
price of a house in rural Ohio, where the value of a typical house is $125,000, then we are
probably doing a horrible job. On the other hand, if we err by this amount in Los Altos
Hills, California, this might represent a stunningly accurate prediction (there, the median
house price exceeds $4 million).
Oneway to address this problem is to measure the discrepancy in the logarithm of the price
estimates. In fact, this is also the official error measure used by the competition to evaluate
the quality of submissions. After all, a small value 𝛿 for | log 𝑦 − log ˆ𝑦| ≤ 𝛿 translates into
𝑒−𝛿 ≤ ˆ𝑦
𝑦 ≤ 𝑒𝛿. Thisleadstothefollowing root-mean-squared-error between the logarithm
of the predicted price and the logarithm of the label price:
1
𝑛
@d2l.add_to_class(KaggleHouse)
def get_dataloader(self, train):
𝑛
𝑖=1
(log 𝑦𝑖 − log ˆ𝑦𝑖)2.
(5.7.2)
(continues on next page)
204
Multilayer Perceptrons
(continued from previous page)
label = 'SalePrice'
data = self.train if train else self.val
if label not in data: return
get_tensor = lambda x: torch.tensor(x.values.astype(float),
dtype=torch.float32)
# Logarithm of prices
tensors = (get_tensor(data.drop(columns=[label])), # X
torch.log(get_tensor(data[label])).reshape((-1, 1))) # Y
return self.get_tensorloader(tensors, train)
5.7.6 𝐾-Fold Cross-Validation
You might recall that we introduced cross-validation in Section 3.6.3, where we discussed
how to deal with model selection. We will put this to good use to select the model design
and to adjust the hyperparameters. We first need a function that returns the 𝑖th fold of the
data in a 𝐾-fold cross-validation procedure. It proceeds by slicing out the 𝑖th segment as
validation data and returning the rest as training data. Note that this is not the most efficient
way of handling data and wewould definitely do something much smarter if our dataset was
considerably larger. But this added complexity might obfuscate our code unnecessarily so
we can safely omit it here owing to the simplicity of our problem.
def k_fold_data(data, k):
rets = []
fold_size = data.train.shape[0] // k
for j in range(k):
idx = range(j * fold_size, (j+1) * fold_size)
rets.append(KaggleHouse(data.batch_size, data.train.drop(index=idx),
data.train.loc[idx]))
return rets
Theaveragevalidation error is returned whenwe train 𝐾 timesinthe 𝐾-foldcross-validation.
def k_fold(trainer, data, k, lr):
val_loss, models = [], []
for i, data_fold in enumerate(k_fold_data(data, k)):
model = d2l.LinearRegression(lr)
model.board.yscale='log'
if i != 0: model.board.display = False
trainer.fit(model, data_fold)
val_loss.append(float(model.board.data['val_loss'][-1].y))
models.append(model)
print(f'average validation log mse = {sum(val_loss)/len(val_loss)}')
return models
5.7.7 Model Selection
In this example, we pick an untuned set of hyperparameters and leave it up to the reader to
improve the model. Findingagoodchoicecantaketime, dependingonhowmanyvariables
one optimizes over. With a large enough dataset, and the normal sorts of hyperparameters,
205
Predicting House Prices on Kaggle
𝐾-fold cross-validation tends to be reasonably resilient against multiple testing. However,
if we try an unreasonably large number of options we might find that our validation perfor
mance is no longer representative of the true error.
trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10)
models = k_fold(trainer, data, k=5, lr=0.01)
average validation log mse = 0.17325432986021042
Notice that sometimes the number of training errors for a set of hyperparameters can be very
low, even as the number of errors on 𝐾-fold cross-validation grows considerably higher.
This indicates that we are overfitting. Throughout training you will want to monitor both
numbers. Less overfitting might indicate that our data can support a more powerful model.
Massive overfitting might suggest that we can gain by incorporating regularization tech
niques.
5.7.8 Submitting Predictions on Kaggle
Now that we know what a good choice of hyperparameters should be, we might calculate
the average predictions on the test set by all the 𝐾 models. Saving the predictions in a csv
file will simplify uploading the results to Kaggle. The following code will generate a file
called submission.csv.
preds = [model(torch.tensor(data.val.values.astype(float), dtype=torch.
↩→float32))
for model in models]
# Taking exponentiation of predictions in the logarithm scale
ensemble_preds = torch.exp(torch.cat(preds, 1)).mean(1)
submission = pd.DataFrame({'Id':data.raw_val.Id,
'SalePrice':ensemble_preds.detach().numpy()})
submission.to_csv('submission.csv', index=False)
Next, as demonstrated in Fig. 5.7.3, we can submit our predictions on Kaggle and see how
they compare with the actual house prices (labels) on the test set. The steps are quite
simple:
• Login to the Kaggle website and visit the house price prediction competition page.
206
Multilayer Perceptrons
Fig. 5.7.3
110
• Click the “Submit Predictions” or “Late Submission” button.
• Click the “Upload Submission File” button in the dashed box at the bottom of the page
and select the prediction file you wish to upload.
• Click the “Make Submission” button at the bottom of the page to view your results.
Submitting data to Kaggle
5.7.9 Summary and Discussion
Real data often contains a mix of different data types and needs to be preprocessed. Rescal
ing real-valued data to zero mean and unit variance is a good default. So is replacing miss
ing values with their mean. Furthermore, transforming categorical features into indicator
features allows us to treat them like one-hot vectors. When we tend to care more about the
relative error than about the absolute error, we can measure the discrepancy in the loga
rithm of the prediction. To select the model and adjust the hyperparameters, we can use
𝐾-fold cross-validation .
5.7.10 Exercises
1. Submit your predictions for this section to Kaggle. How good are they?
2. Is it always a good idea to replace missing values by a mean? Hint: can you construct a
situation where the values are not missing at random?
3. Improve the score by tuning the hyperparameters through 𝐾-fold cross-validation.
4. Improve the score by improving the model (e.g., layers, weight decay, and dropout).
5. What happens if we do not standardize the continuous numerical features as we have
done in this section?
Discussions110.
