7
Convolutional Neural Networks
Image data is represented as a two-dimensional grid of pixels, be the image monochro
matic or in color. Accordingly each pixel corresponds to one or multiple numerical values
respectively. So far we have ignored this rich structure and treated images as vectors of
numbers by flattening them, irrespective of the spatial relation between pixels. This deeply
unsatisfying approach was necessary in order to feed the resulting one-dimensional vectors
through a fully connected MLP.
Because these networks are invariant to the order of the features, we could get similar
results regardless of whether we preserve an order corresponding to the spatial structure
of the pixels or if we permute the columns of our design matrix before fitting the MLP’s
parameters. Ideally, we would leverage our prior knowledge that nearby pixels are typically
related to each other, to build efficient models for learning from image data.
This chapter introduces convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1995), a
powerful family of neural networks that are designed for precisely this purpose. CNN
based architectures are now ubiquitous in the field of computer vision. For instance, on the
Imagnet collection (Deng et al., 2009) it was only the use of convolutional neural networks,
in short Convnets, that provided significant performance improvements (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012).
Modern CNNs, as they are called colloquially, owe their design to inspirations from biol
ogy, group theory, and a healthy dose of experimental tinkering. In addition to their sample
efficiency in achieving accurate models, CNNs tend to be computationally efficient, both
because they require fewer parameters than fully connected architectures and because con
volutions are easy to parallelize across GPU cores (Chetlur et al., 2014). Consequently,
practitioners often apply CNNs whenever possible, and increasingly they have emerged
as credible competitors even on tasks with a one-dimensional sequence structure, such as
audio (Abdel-Hamid et al., 2014), text (Kalchbrenner et al., 2014), and time series analy
sis (LeCun et al., 1995), where recurrent neural networks are conventionally used. Some
clever adaptations of CNNs have also brought them to bear on graph-structured data (Kipf
and Welling, 2016) and in recommender systems.
First, we will dive more deeply into the motivation for convolutional neural networks. This
is followed by a walk through the basic operations that comprise the backbone of all con
volutional networks. These include the convolutional layers themselves, nitty-gritty details
including padding and stride, the pooling layers used to aggregate information across ad
jacent spatial regions, the use of multiple channels at each layer, and a careful discussion
233
234
Convolutional Neural Networks
of the structure of modern architectures. We will conclude the chapter with a full working
example of LeNet, the first convolutional network successfully deployed, long before the
rise of modern deep learning. In the next chapter, we will dive into full implementations of
some popular and comparatively recent CNN architectures whose designs represent most
of the techniques commonly used by modern practitioners.
7.1 From Fully Connected Layers to Convolutions
To this day, the models that we have discussed so far remain appropriate options when we
are dealing with tabular data. By tabular, we mean that the data consist of rows corre
sponding to examples and columns corresponding to features. With tabular data, we might
anticipate that the patterns we seek could involve interactions among the features, but we
do not assume any structure a priori concerning how the features interact.
Sometimes, we truly lack the knowledge to be able to guide the construction of fancier
architectures. In these cases, an MLP may be the best that we can do. However, for high
dimensional perceptual data, such structureless networks can grow unwieldy.
For instance, let’s return to our running example of distinguishing cats from dogs. Say that
we do a thorough job in data collection, collecting an annotated dataset of one-megapixel
photographs. This means that each input to the network has one million dimensions. Even
an aggressive reduction to one thousand hidden dimensions would require a fully connected
layer characterized by 106×103 = 109 parameters. UnlesswehavelotsofGPUs, atalentfor
distributed optimization, and an extraordinary amount of patience, learning the parameters
of this network may turn out to be infeasible.
A careful reader might object to this argument on the basis that one megapixel resolution
may not be necessary. However, while we might be able to get away with one hundred
thousand pixels, our hidden layer of size 1000 grossly underestimates the number of hid
den units that it takes to learn good representations of images, so a practical system will
still require billions of parameters. Moreover, learning a classifier by fitting so many pa
rameters might require collecting an enormous dataset. And yet today both humans and
computers are able to distinguish cats from dogs quite well, seemingly contradicting these
intuitions. That is because images exhibit rich structure that can be exploited by humans
and machine learning models alike. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are one cre
ative way that machine learning has embraced for exploiting some of the known structure
in natural images.
7.1.1 Invariance
Imagine that we want to detect an object in an image. It seems reasonable that whatever
methodweuse to recognize objectsshould notbeoverlyconcernedwith the precise location
of the object in the image. Ideally, our system should exploit this knowledge. Pigs usually
do not fly and planes usually do not swim. Nonetheless, we should still recognize a pig
235
From Fully Connected Layers to Convolutions
Fig. 7.1.1
were one to appear at the top of the image. We can draw some inspiration here from the
children’s game “Where’s Waldo” (which itself has inspired many real-life imitations, such
as that depicted in Fig. 7.1.1). The game consists of a number of chaotic scenes bursting
with activities. Waldo shows up somewhere in each, typically lurking in some unlikely
location. The reader’s goal is to locate him. Despite his characteristic outfit, this can be
surprisingly difficult, due to the large number of distractions. However, what Waldo looks
like does not depend upon whereWaldo is located. WecouldsweeptheimagewithaWaldo
detector that could assign a score to each patch, indicating the likelihood that the patch
contains Waldo. In fact, many object detection and segmentation algorithms are based
on this approach (Long et al., 2015). CNNs systematize this idea of spatial invariance,
exploiting it to learn useful representations with fewer parameters.
Can you find Waldo (image courtesy of William Murphy (Infomatique))?
We can now make these intuitions more concrete by enumerating a few desiderata to guide
our design of a neural network architecture suitable for computer vision:
1. In the earliest layers, our network should respond similarly to the same patch, regardless
of where it appears in the image. This principle is called translation invariance (or
translation equivariance).
2. The earliest layers of the network should focus on local regions, without regard for the
contents of the image in distant regions. This is the locality principle. Eventually, these
local representations can be aggregated to make predictions at the whole image level.
3. As we proceed, deeper layers should be able to capture longer-range features of the
image, in a way similar to higher level vision in nature.
Let’s see how this translates into mathematics.
7.1.2 Constraining the MLP
Tostart off, wecanconsideranMLPwithtwo-dimensionalimagesXasinputsandtheirim
mediatehidden representations Hsimilarlyrepresentedasmatrices(theyaretwo-dimensional
236
Convolutional Neural Networks
tensors in code), where both X and H have the same shape. Let that sink in. We now
imagine that not only the inputs but also the hidden representations possess spatial struc
ture.
Let [X]𝑖,𝑗 and [H]𝑖,𝑗 denote the pixel at location (𝑖, 𝑗) in the input image and hidden rep
resentation, respectively. Consequently, to have each of the hidden units receive input from
each of the input pixels, we would switch from using weight matrices (as we did previously
in MLPs) to representing our parameters as fourth-order weight tensors W. Suppose that
Ucontains biases, we could formally express the fully connected layer as
[H]𝑖,𝑗 = [U]𝑖,𝑗 +
= [U]𝑖,𝑗 +
[W]𝑖,𝑗,𝑘,𝑙[X]𝑘,𝑙
𝑘
𝑙
𝑎 𝑏
[V]𝑖,𝑗,𝑎,𝑏[X]𝑖+𝑎,𝑗+𝑏.
(7.1.1)
The switch from W to V is entirely cosmetic for now since there is a one-to-one correspon
dence between coefficients in both fourth-order tensors. We simply re-index the subscripts
(𝑘, 𝑙) such that 𝑘 = 𝑖 + 𝑎 and 𝑙 = 𝑗 + 𝑏. In other words, we set [V]𝑖,𝑗,𝑎,𝑏 = [W]𝑖,𝑗,𝑖+𝑎,𝑗+𝑏.
The indices 𝑎 and 𝑏 run over both positive and negative offsets, covering the entire image.
For any given location (𝑖, 𝑗) in the hidden representation [H]𝑖,𝑗, we compute its value by
summing over pixels in 𝑥, centered around (𝑖, 𝑗) and weighted by [V]𝑖,𝑗,𝑎,𝑏. Before we
carry on, let’s consider the total number of parameters required for a single layer in this
parametrization: a 1000 × 1000 image (1 megapixel) is mapped to a 1000 × 1000 hidden
representation. This requires 1012 parameters, far beyond what computers currently can
handle.
Translation Invariance
Now let’s invoke the first principle established above: translation invariance (Zhang et al.,
1988). This implies that a shift in the input X should simply lead to a shift in the hidden
representation H. This is only possible if V and U do not actually depend on (𝑖, 𝑗). As
such, we have [V]𝑖,𝑗,𝑎,𝑏 = [V]𝑎,𝑏 and U is a constant, say 𝑢. As a result, we can simplify
the definition for H:
[H]𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑢 +
[V]𝑎,𝑏[X]𝑖+𝑎,𝑗+𝑏.
𝑎 𝑏
(7.1.2)
This is a convolution! We are effectively weighting pixels at (𝑖 + 𝑎, 𝑗 + 𝑏) in the vicinity of
location (𝑖, 𝑗) with coefficients [V]𝑎,𝑏 to obtain the value [H]𝑖,𝑗. Note that [V]𝑎,𝑏 needs
many fewer coefficients than [V]𝑖,𝑗,𝑎,𝑏 since it no longer depends on the location within
the image. Consequently, the number of parameters required is no longer 1012 but a much
more reasonable 4 × 106: we still have the dependency on 𝑎,𝑏 ∈ (−1000,1000). In short,
we have made significant progress. Time-delay neural networks (TDNNs) are some of the
first examples to exploit this idea (Waibel et al., 1989).
Locality
Now let’s invoke the second principle: locality. As motivated above, we believe that we
should not have to look very far away from location (𝑖, 𝑗) in order to glean relevant infor
237
From Fully Connected Layers to Convolutions
mation to assess what is going on at [H]𝑖,𝑗. This means that outside some range |𝑎| > Δ
or |𝑏| > Δ, we should set [V]𝑎,𝑏 = 0. Equivalently, we can rewrite [H]𝑖,𝑗 as
Δ
Δ
[H]𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑢 +
𝑎=−Δ
𝑏=−Δ
[V]𝑎,𝑏[X]𝑖+𝑎,𝑗+𝑏.
(7.1.3)
Thisreduces the number ofparametersfrom4×106 to4Δ2,whereΔistypicallysmallerthan
10. As such, we reduced the number of parameters by another four orders of magnitude.
Note that (7.1.3), is what is called, in a nutshell, a convolutional layer. Convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) are a special family of neural networks that contain convolutional
layers. In the deep learning research community, V is referred to as a convolution kernel,
a filter, or simply the layer’s weights that are learnable parameters.
While previously, we might have required billions of parameters to represent just a single
layer in an image-processing network, we now typically need just a few hundred, without
altering the dimensionality of either the inputs or the hidden representations. The price
paid for this drastic reduction in parameters is that our features are now translation invariant
and that our layer can only incorporate local information, when determining the value of
each hidden activation. All learning depends on imposing inductive bias. When that bias
agrees with reality, we get sample-efficient models that generalize well to unseen data. But
of course, if those biases do not agree with reality, e.g., if images turned out not to be
translation invariant, our models might struggle even to fit our training data.
This dramatic reduction in parameters brings us to our last desideratum, namely that deeper
layers should represent larger and more complex aspects of an image. This can be achieved
by interleaving nonlinearities and convolutional layers repeatedly.
7.1.3 Convolutions
Let’s briefly review why (7.1.3) is called a convolution. In mathematics, the convolution
between two functions (Rudin, 1973), say 𝑓,𝑔 : R𝑑 → R is defined as
( 𝑓 ∗ 𝑔)(x) =
𝑓 (z)𝑔(x − z)𝑑z.
(7.1.4)
That is, we measure the overlap between 𝑓 and 𝑔 whenonefunctionis“flipped” and shifted
by x. Whenever we have discrete objects, the integral turns into a sum. For instance, for
vectors from the set of square-summable infinite-dimensional vectors with index running
over Z we obtain the following definition:
( 𝑓 ∗ 𝑔)(𝑖) =
𝑓 (𝑎)𝑔(𝑖 − 𝑎).
𝑎
(7.1.5)
For two-dimensional tensors, we have a corresponding sum with indices (𝑎, 𝑏) for 𝑓 and
(𝑖 − 𝑎, 𝑗 − 𝑏) for 𝑔, respectively:
( 𝑓 ∗ 𝑔)(𝑖, 𝑗) =
𝑓 (𝑎, 𝑏)𝑔(𝑖 − 𝑎, 𝑗 − 𝑏).
𝑎 𝑏
(7.1.6)
This looks similar to (7.1.3), with one major difference. Rather than using (𝑖 + 𝑎, 𝑗 + 𝑏),
we are using the difference instead. Note, though, that this distinction is mostly cosmetic
238
Convolutional Neural Networks
Fig. 7.1.2
since we can always match the notation between(7.1.3)and(7.1.6). Ouroriginaldefinition
in (7.1.3) more properly describes a cross-correlation. We will come back to this in the
following section.
7.1.4 Channels
Returning to our Waldo detector, let’sseewhatthislookslike. Theconvolutionallayerpicks
windows of a given size and weighs intensities according to the filter V, as demonstrated
in Fig. 7.1.2. We might aim to learn a model so that wherever the “waldoness” is highest,
we should find a peak in the hidden layer representations.
Detect Waldo (image courtesy of William Murphy (Infomatique)).
There is just one problem with this approach. So far, we blissfully ignored that images
consist of three channels: red, green, and blue. In sum, images are not two-dimensional
objects but rather third-order tensors, characterized by a height, width, and channel, e.g.,
with shape 1024×1024×3 pixels. Whilethefirsttwooftheseaxesconcernspatial relation
ships, the third can be regarded as assigning amultidimensional representation to each pixel
location. We thus index X as [X]𝑖,𝑗,𝑘. The convolutional filter has to adapt accordingly.
Instead of [V]𝑎,𝑏, we now have [V]𝑎,𝑏,𝑐.
Moreover, just as our input consists of a third-order tensor, it turns out to be a good idea
to similarly formulate our hidden representations as third-order tensors H. In other words,
rather than just having a single hidden representation corresponding to each spatiallocation,
we want an entire vector of hidden representations corresponding to each spatial location.
We could think of the hidden representations as comprising a number of two-dimensional
grids stacked on top of each other. As in the inputs, these are sometimes called channels.
They are also sometimes called feature maps, as each provides a spatialized set of learned
features for the subsequent layer. Intuitively, you might imagine that at lower layers that are
closer to inputs, some channels could become specialized to recognize edges while others
could recognize textures.
To support multiple channels in both inputs (X) and hidden representations (H), we can add
239
From Fully Connected Layers to Convolutions
a fourth coordinate to V: [V]𝑎,𝑏,𝑐,𝑑. Putting everything together we have:
Δ
[H]𝑖,𝑗,𝑑 =
𝑎=−Δ
Δ
𝑏=−Δ 𝑐
[V]𝑎,𝑏,𝑐,𝑑[X]𝑖+𝑎,𝑗+𝑏,𝑐,
(7.1.7)
where 𝑑 indexes the output channels in the hidden representations H. The subsequent con
volutional layer will go on to take a third-order tensor, H, as input. We take (7.1.7), because
of its generality, as the definition of a convolutional layer for multiple channels, where V
is a kernel or filter of the layer.
There are still many operations that we need to address. For instance, we need to figure out
how to combine all the hidden representations to a single output, e.g., whether there is a
Waldo anywhere in the image. We also need to decide how to compute things efficiently,
how to combine multiple layers, appropriate activation functions, and how to make reason
able design choices to yield networks that are effective in practice. We turn to these issues
in the remainder of the chapter.
7.1.5 Summary and Discussion
In this section we derived the structure of convolutional neural networks from first prin
ciples. While it is unclear whether this was the route taken to the invention of CNNs, it
is satisfying to know that they are the right choice when applying reasonable principles
to how image processing and computer vision algorithms should operate, at least at lower
levels. In particular, translation invariance in images implies that all patches of an image
will be treated in the same manner. Locality means that only a small neighborhood of pix
els will be used to compute the corresponding hidden representations. Some of the earliest
references to CNNs are in the form of the Neocognitron (Fukushima, 1982).
A second principle that we encountered in our reasoning is how to reduce the number of
parameters in a function class without limiting its expressive power, at least, whenever
certain assumptions on the model hold. We saw a dramatic reduction of complexity as a
result of this restriction, turning computationally and statistically infeasible problems into
tractable models.
Addingchannels allowedus to bring back some of the complexity that was lost due to there
strictions imposed on the convolutional kernel by locality and translation invariance. Note
that it is quite natural to add channels other than just red, green, and blue. Many satellite
images, in particular for agriculture and meteorology, have tens to hundreds of channels,
generating hyperspectral images instead. They report data on many different wavelengths.
In the following we will see how to use convolutions effectively to manipulate the dimen
sionality of the images they operate on, how to move from location-based to channel-based
representations, and how to deal with large numbers of categories efficiently.
7.1.6 Exercises
1. Assume that the size of the convolution kernel is Δ = 0. Show that in this case the
convolution kernel implements an MLP independently for each set of channels. This
leads to the Network in Network architectures (Lin et al., 2013).
240
Convolutional Neural Networks
119
2. Audio data is often represented as a one-dimensional sequence.
1. When might you want to impose locality and translation invariance for audio?
2. Derive the convolution operations for audio.
3. Can you treat audio using the same tools as computer vision? Hint: use the spectro
gram.
3. Whymight translation invariance not be a good idea after all? Give an example.
4. Do you think that convolutional layers might also be applicable for text data? Which
problems might you encounter with language?
5. What happens with convolutions when an object is at the boundary of an image?
6. Prove that the convolution is symmetric, i.e., 𝑓 ∗ 𝑔 = 𝑔 ∗ 𝑓.
Discussions119.
7.2 Convolutions for Images
Now that we understand how convolutional layers work in theory, we are ready to see how
they work in practice. Building on our motivation of convolutional neural networks as
efficient architectures for exploring structure in image data, we stick with images as our
running example.
import torch
from torch import nn
from d2l import torch as d2l
7.2.1 The Cross-Correlation Operation
Recall that strictly speaking, convolutional layers are a misnomer, since the operations they
express are more accurately described as cross-correlations. Based on our descriptions of
convolutional layers in Section 7.1, in such a layer, an input tensor and a kernel tensor are
combined to produce an output tensor through a cross-correlation operation.
Let’s ignore channels for nowandseehowthisworkswithtwo-dimensionaldataandhidden
representations. In Fig. 7.2.1, the input is a two-dimensional tensor with a height of 3 and
width of 3. We mark the shape of the tensor as 3×3 or (3, 3). The height and width of the
kernel are both 2. The shape of the kernel window (or convolution window) is given by the
height and width of the kernel (here it is 2 × 2).
In the two-dimensional cross-correlation operation, we begin with the convolution window
positioned at the upper-left corner of the input tensor and slide it across the input tensor,
both from left to right and top to bottom. When the convolution window slides to a certain
241
Convolutions for Images
Fig. 7.2.1
Two-dimensional cross-correlation operation. The shaded portions are the first output
element as well as the input and kernel tensor elements used for the output computation:
0 ×0+1×1+3×2+4×3=19.
position, the input subtensor contained in that window and the kernel tensor are multiplied
elementwise and the resulting tensor is summed up yielding a single scalar value. This
result gives the value of the output tensor at the corresponding location. Here, the output
tensor has a height of 2 and width of 2 and the four elements are derived from the two
dimensional cross-correlation operation:
0 ×0+1×1+3×2+4×3=19,
1 ×0+2×1+4×2+5×3=25,
3 ×0+4×1+6×2+7×3=37,
4 ×0+5×1+7×2+8×3=43.
(7.2.1)
Note that along each axis, the output size is slightly smaller than the input size. Because
the kernel has width and height greater than 1, we can only properly compute the cross
correlation for locations where the kernel fits wholly within the image, the output size is
given by the input size 𝑛h ×𝑛w minus the size of the convolution kernel 𝑘h × 𝑘w via
(𝑛h − 𝑘h +1) × (𝑛w − 𝑘w +1).
(7.2.2)
This is the case since we need enough space to “shift” the convolution kernel across the
image. Later we will see how to keep the size unchanged by padding the image with zeros
around its boundary so that there is enough space to shift the kernel. Next, we implement
this process in the corr2d function, which accepts an input tensor X and a kernel tensor K
and returns an output tensor Y.
def corr2d(X, K): #@save
"""Compute 2D cross-correlation."""
h, w = K.shape
Y = torch.zeros((X.shape[0]- h + 1, X.shape[1]- w + 1))
for i in range(Y.shape[0]):
for j in range(Y.shape[1]):
Y[i, j] = (X[i:i + h, j:j + w] * K).sum()
return Y
We can construct the input tensor X and the kernel tensor K from Fig. 7.2.1 to validate
the output of the above implementation of the two-dimensional cross-correlation opera
tion.
X = torch.tensor([[0.0, 1.0, 2.0], [3.0, 4.0, 5.0], [6.0, 7.0, 8.0]])
(continues on next page)
242
Convolutional Neural Networks
(continued from previous page)
K = torch.tensor([[0.0, 1.0], [2.0, 3.0]])
corr2d(X, K)
tensor([[19., 25.],
[37., 43.]])
7.2.2 Convolutional Layers
Aconvolutional layer cross-correlates the input and kernel and adds a scalar bias to produce
an output. The two parameters of a convolutional layer are the kernel and the scalar bias.
When training models based on convolutional layers, we typically initialize the kernels
randomly, just as we would with a fully connected layer.
We arenow ready toimplementatwo-dimensionalconvolutional layer based on the corr2d
function defined above. In the __init__ constructor method, we declare weight and bias
as the two model parameters. The forward propagation method calls the corr2d function
and adds the bias.
class Conv2D(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, kernel_size):
super().__init__()
self.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.rand(kernel_size))
self.bias = nn.Parameter(torch.zeros(1))
def forward(self, x):
return corr2d(x, self.weight) + self.bias
In ℎ×𝑤 convolution or an ℎ×𝑤 convolution kernel, theheight andwidthoftheconvolution
kernel are ℎ and 𝑤, respectively. We also refer to a convolutional layer with an ℎ × 𝑤
convolution kernel simply as an ℎ × 𝑤 convolutional layer.
7.2.3 Object Edge Detection in Images
Let’s take a moment to parse a simple application of a convolutional layer: detecting the
edge of an object in an imageby finding the location of the pixel change. First, we construct
an “image” of 6 × 8 pixels. The middle four columns are black (0) and the rest are white
(1).
X = torch.ones((6, 8))
X[:, 2:6] = 0
X
tensor([[1., 1., 0., 0., 0., 0., 1., 1.],
[1., 1., 0., 0., 0., 0., 1., 1.],
[1., 1., 0., 0., 0., 0., 1., 1.],
(continues on next page)
243
Convolutions for Images
(continued from previous page)
[1., 1., 0., 0., 0., 0., 1., 1.],
[1., 1., 0., 0., 0., 0., 1., 1.],
[1., 1., 0., 0., 0., 0., 1., 1.]])
Next, we construct a kernel K with a height of 1 and a width of 2. When we perform
the cross-correlation operation with the input, if the horizontally adjacent elements are
the same, the output is 0. Otherwise, the output is nonzero. Note that this kernel is a
special case of a finite difference operator. At location (𝑖, 𝑗) it computes 𝑥𝑖,𝑗 − 𝑥(𝑖+1),𝑗,
i.e., it computes the difference between the values of horizontally adjacent pixels. This is
a discrete approximation of the first derivative in the horizontal direction. After all, for
a function 𝑓 (𝑖, 𝑗) its derivative −𝜕𝑖 𝑓 (𝑖, 𝑗) = lim𝜖→0 
�
�(𝑖,𝑗)−𝑓(𝑖+𝜖,𝑗)
𝜖
works in practice.
K = torch.tensor([[1.0,-1.0]])
. Let’s see how this
We are ready to perform the cross-correlation operation with arguments X (our input) and
K (our kernel). As you can see, we detect 1 for the edge from white to black and −1 for the
edge from black to white. All other outputs take value 0.
Y = corr2d(X, K)
Y
tensor([[ 0., 1., 0., 0., 0.,-1., 0.],
[ 0., 1., 0., 0., 0.,-1., 0.],
[ 0., 1., 0., 0., 0.,-1., 0.],
[ 0., 1., 0., 0., 0.,-1., 0.],
[ 0., 1., 0., 0., 0.,-1., 0.],
[ 0., 1., 0., 0., 0.,-1., 0.]])
We can now apply the kernel to the transposed image. As expected, it vanishes. The kernel
K only detects vertical edges.
corr2d(X.t(), K)
tensor([[0., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[0., 0., 0., 0., 0.]])
7.2.4 Learning a Kernel
244
Convolutional Neural Networks
Designing an edge detector by finite differences [1,-1] is neat if we know this is precisely
what we are looking for. However, as we look at larger kernels, and consider successive
layers of convolutions, it might be impossible to specify precisely what each filter should
be doing manually.
Now let’s see whether we can learn the kernel that generated Y from X by looking at the
input–output pairs only. We first construct a convolutional layer and initialize its kernel as
a random tensor. Next, in eachiteration, we will use the squared error to compare Y with the
output of the convolutional layer. We can then calculate the gradient to update the kernel.
For the sake of simplicity, in the following we use the built-in class for two-dimensional
convolutional layers and ignore the bias.
# Construct a two-dimensional convolutional layer with 1 output channel and a
# kernel of shape (1, 2). For the sake of simplicity, we ignore the bias here
conv2d = nn.LazyConv2d(1, kernel_size=(1, 2), bias=False)
# The two-dimensional convolutional layer uses four-dimensional input and
# output in the format of (example, channel, height, width), where the batch
# size (number of examples in the batch) and the number of channels are both 1
X = X.reshape((1, 1, 6, 8))
Y = Y.reshape((1, 1, 6, 7))
lr = 3e-2 # Learning rate
for i in range(10):
Y_hat = conv2d(X)
l = (Y_hat- Y) ** 2
conv2d.zero_grad()
l.sum().backward()
# Update the kernel
conv2d.weight.data[:]-= lr * conv2d.weight.grad
if (i + 1) % 2 == 0:
print(f'epoch {i + 1}, loss {l.sum():.3f}')
epoch 2, loss 16.481
epoch 4, loss 5.069
epoch 6, loss 1.794
epoch 8, loss 0.688
epoch 10, loss 0.274
Note that the error has dropped to a small value after 10 iterations. Now we will take a look
at the kernel tensor we learned.
conv2d.weight.data.reshape((1, 2))
tensor([[ 1.0398,-0.9328]])
Indeed, the learned kernel tensor is remarkably close to the kernel tensor K we defined
earlier.
245
Convolutions for Images
7.2.5 Cross-Correlation and Convolution
Recall our observation from Section7.1 of the correspondencebetween the cross-correlation
and convolution operations. Here let’s continue to consider two-dimensional convolutional
layers. What if such layers perform strict convolution operations as defined in (7.1.6) in
stead of cross-correlations? In order to obtain the output of the strict convolution operation,
we only need to flip the two-dimensional kernel tensor both horizontally and vertically, and
then perform the cross-correlation operation with the input tensor.
It is noteworthy that since kernels are learned from data in deep learning, the outputs of
convolutional layers remain unaffected no matter such layers perform either the strict con
volution operations or the cross-correlation operations.
To illustrate this, suppose that a convolutional layer performs cross-correlation and learns
the kernel in Fig. 7.2.1, which is here denoted as the matrix K. Assuming that other con
ditions remain unchanged, when this layer instead performs strict convolution, the learned
kernel Kwill be the same as K after Kis flipped both horizontally and vertically. That
is to say, when the convolutional layer performs strict convolution for the input in Fig.
7.2.1 and K, the same output in Fig. 7.2.1 (cross-correlation of the input and K) will be
obtained.
In keeping with standard terminology in deep learningliterature, wewillcontinuetoreferto
the cross-correlation operation as a convolution even though, strictly-speaking, it is slightly
different. Furthermore, we use the term element to refer to an entry (or component) of any
tensor representing a layer representation or a convolution kernel.
7.2.6 Feature Map and Receptive Field
As described in Section 7.1.4, the convolutional layer output in Fig. 7.2.1 is sometimes
called a feature map, as it can be regarded as the learned representations (features) in the
spatial dimensions (e.g., width and height) to the subsequent layer. In CNNs, for any el
ement 𝑥 of some layer, its receptive field refers to all the elements (from all the previous
layers) that may affect the calculation of 𝑥 during the forward propagation. Note that the
receptive field may be larger than the actual size of the input.
Let’s continue to use Fig. 7.2.1 to explain the receptive field. Given the 2 × 2 convolution
kernel, the receptive field of the shaded output element (of value 19) is the four elements
in the shaded portion of the input. Now let’s denote the 2 × 2 output as Y and consider a
deeper CNN with an additional 2×2 convolutional layer that takes Y as its input, outputting
a single element 𝑧. In this case, the receptive field of 𝑧 on Y includes all the four elements
of Y,whilethereceptive field on the input includes all the nine input elements. Thus, when
any element in a feature map needs a larger receptive field to detect input features over a
broader area, we can build a deeper network.
Receptive fields derive their name from neurophysiology. A series of experiments on a
range of animals using different stimuli (Hubel and Wiesel, 1959, Hubel and Wiesel, 1962,
Hubel and Wiesel, 1968) explored the response of what is called the visual cortex on said
stimuli. By and large they found that lower levels respond to edges and related shapes.
246
Convolutional Neural Networks
Fig. 7.2.2
Later on, Field (1987) illustrated this effect on natural images with, what can only be called,
convolutional kernels. We reprint a key figure in Fig. 7.2.2 to illustrate the striking simi
larities.
Figure and caption taken from Field (1987): An example of coding with six different
channels. (Left) Examples of the six types of sensor associated with each channel. (Right)
Convolution of the image in (Middle) with the six sensors shown in (Left). The response
of the individual sensors is determined by sampling these filtered images at a distance
proportional to the size of the sensor (shown with dots). This diagram shows the response
of only the even symmetric sensors.
As it turns out, this relation even holds for the features computed by deeper layers of net
works trained on image classification tasks, as demonstrated in, for example, Kuzovkin et
al. (2018). Suffice it to say, convolutions have proven to be an incredibly powerful tool for
computer vision, both in biology and in code. As such, it is not surprising (in hindsight)
that they heralded the recent success in deep learning.
7.2.7 Summary
The core computation required for a convolutional layer is a cross-correlation operation.
We saw that a simple nested for-loop is all that is required to compute its value. If we
have multiple input and multiple output channels, we are performing a matrix–matrix op
eration between channels. As can be seen, the computation is straightforward and, most
importantly, highly local. This affords significant hardware optimization and many recent
results in computer vision are only possible because of that. After all, it means that chip
designers can invest in fast computation rather than memory when it comes to optimizing
for convolutions. While this may not lead to optimal designs for other applications, it does
open the door to ubiquitous and affordable computer vision.
247
Padding and Stride
120
In terms of convolutions themselves, they can be used for many purposes, for example
detecting edges and lines, blurring images, or sharpening them. Most importantly, it is
not necessary that the statistician (or engineer) invents suitable filters. Instead, we can
simply learn them from data. This replaces feature engineering heuristics by evidence
based statistics. Lastly, and quite delightfully, these filters are not just advantageous for
building deep networks but they also correspond to receptive fields and feature maps in the
brain. This gives us confidence that we are on the right track.
7.2.8 Exercises
1. Construct an image X with diagonal edges.
1. What happens if you apply the kernel K in this section to it?
2. What happens if you transpose X?
3. What happens if you transpose K?
2. Design some kernels manually.
1. Given a directional vector v = (𝑣1,𝑣2), derive an edge-detection kernel that detects
edges orthogonal to v, i.e., edges in the direction (𝑣2,−𝑣1).
2. Derive a finite difference operator for the second derivative. What is the minimum
size of the convolutional kernel associated with it? Which structures in images re
spond most strongly to it?
3. Howwould you design a blur kernel? Why might you want to use such a kernel?
4. What is the minimum size of a kernel to obtain a derivative of order 𝑑?
3. When you try to automatically find the gradient for the Conv2D class we created, what
kind of error message do you see?
4. Howdoyourepresentacross-correlation operation as a matrix multiplication by chang
ing the input and kernel tensors?
Discussions120.
7.3 Padding and Stride
Recall the example of a convolution in Fig. 7.2.1. The input had both a height and width of
3 and the convolution kernel had both a height and width of 2, yielding an output represen
tation with dimension 2 ×2. Assuming that the input shape is 𝑛h ×𝑛w and the convolution
kernel shape is 𝑘h × 𝑘w, the output shape will be (𝑛h − 𝑘h + 1) × (𝑛w − 𝑘w + 1): we can
only shift the convolution kernel so far until it runs out of pixels to apply the convolution
to.
248
Convolutional Neural Networks
Fig. 7.3.1
In the following we will explore a number of techniques, including padding and strided
convolutions, that offer more control over the size of the output. As motivation, note that
since kernels generally have width and height greater than 1, afterapplyingmanysuccessive
convolutions, we tend to wind up with outputs that are considerably smaller than our input.
If we start with a 240 × 240 pixel image, ten layers of 5 ×5 convolutions reduce the image
to 200 × 200 pixels, slicing off 30% of the image and with it obliterating any interesting
information on the boundaries of the original image. Padding is the most popular tool for
handling this issue. In other cases, we may want to reduce the dimensionality drastically,
e.g., if we find the original input resolution to be unwieldy. Strided convolutions are a
popular technique that can help in these instances.
import torch
from torch import nn
7.3.1 Padding
As described above, one tricky issue when applying convolutional layers is that we tend
to lose pixels on the perimeter of our image. Consider Fig. 7.3.1 that depicts the pixel
utilization as a function of the convolution kernel size and the position within the image.
The pixels in the corners are hardly used at all.
Pixel utilization for convolutions of size 1 × 1, 2 × 2, and 3 × 3 respectively.
Since we typically use small kernels, for any given convolution we might only lose a few
pixels but this can add up as we apply many successive convolutional layers. One straight
forward solution to this problem is to add extra pixels of filler around the boundary of our
input image, thus increasing the effective size of the image. Typically, we set the values of
the extra pixels to zero. In Fig. 7.3.2, we pad a 3×3 input, increasing its size to 5×5. The
corresponding output then increases to a 4×4 matrix. The shaded portions are the first out
put element as well as the input and kernel tensor elements used for the output computation:
0 ×0+0×1+0×2+0×3=0.
Fig. 7.3.2
Two-dimensional cross-correlation with padding.
249
Padding and Stride
In general, if we add a total of 𝑝h rows of padding (roughly half on top and half on bottom)
and a total of 𝑝w columns of padding (roughly half on the left and half on the right), the
output shape will be
(𝑛h − 𝑘h + 𝑝h +1) × (𝑛w − 𝑘w + 𝑝w +1).
(7.3.1)
This means that the height and width of the output will increase by 𝑝h and 𝑝w, respec
tively.
In many cases, we will want to set 𝑝h = 𝑘h − 1 and 𝑝w = 𝑘w − 1 to give the input and
output the same height and width. This will make it easier to predict the output shape of
each layer when constructing the network. Assuming that 𝑘h is odd here, we will pad 𝑝h/2
rows on both sides of the height. If 𝑘h is even, one possibility is to pad 𝑝h/2 rows on the
top of the input and 𝑝h/2 rows on the bottom. We will pad both sides of the width in the
same way.
CNNs commonly use convolution kernels with odd height and width values, such as 1, 3,
5, or 7. Choosing odd kernel sizes has the benefit that we can preserve the dimensionality
while padding with the same number of rows on top and bottom, and the same number of
columns on left and right.
Moreover, this practice of using odd kernels and padding to precisely preserve dimension
ality offers a clerical benefit. For any two-dimensional tensor X, when the kernel’s size is
odd and the number of padding rows and columns on all sides are the same, thereby pro
ducing an output with the same height and width as the input, we know that the output Y[i,
j] is calculated by cross-correlation of the input and convolution kernel with the window
centered on X[i, j].
In the following example, we create a two-dimensional convolutional layer with a height
and width of 3 and apply 1 pixel of padding on all sides. Given an input with a height and
width of 8, we find that the height and width of the output is also 8.
# We define a helper function to calculate convolutions. It initializes the
# convolutional layer weights and performs corresponding dimensionality
# elevations and reductions on the input and output
def comp_conv2d(conv2d, X):
# (1, 1) indicates that batch size and the number of channels are both 1
X = X.reshape((1, 1) + X.shape)
Y = conv2d(X)
# Strip the first two dimensions: examples and channels
return Y.reshape(Y.shape[2:])
# 1 row and column is padded on either side, so a total of 2 rows or columns
# are added
conv2d = nn.LazyConv2d(1, kernel_size=3, padding=1)
X = torch.rand(size=(8, 8))
comp_conv2d(conv2d, X).shape
torch.Size([8, 8])
250
Convolutional Neural Networks
Fig. 7.3.3
When the height and width of the convolution kernel are different, we can make the output
and input have the same height and width by setting different padding numbers for height
and width.
# We use a convolution kernel with height 5 and width 3. The padding on either
# side of the height and width are 2 and 1, respectively
conv2d = nn.LazyConv2d(1, kernel_size=(5, 3), padding=(2, 1))
comp_conv2d(conv2d, X).shape
torch.Size([8, 8])
7.3.2 Stride
When computing the cross-correlation, we start with the convolution window at the upper
left corner of the input tensor, and then slide it over all locations both down and to the
right. In the previous examples, we defaulted to sliding one element at a time. However,
sometimes, either for computational efficiency or because we wish to downsample, we
move our window more than one element at a time, skipping the intermediate locations.
This is particularly useful if the convolution kernel is large since it captures a large area of
the underlying image.
We refer to the number of rows and columns traversed per slide as stride. So far, we have
used strides of 1, both for height and width. Sometimes, we may want to use a larger stride.
Fig. 7.3.3 shows a two-dimensional cross-correlation operation with a stride of 3 vertically
and 2 horizontally. The shaded portions are the output elements as well as the input and
kernel tensor elements used for the output computation: 0 × 0 + 0 × 1 + 1 × 2 + 2 × 3 = 8,
0×0+6×1+0×2+0×3 = 6. Wecanseethatwhenthesecondelementofthefirstcolumnis
generated, the convolution window slides down three rows. The convolution window slides
two columns to the right when the second element of the first row is generated. When the
convolution window continues to slide two columns to the right on the input, there is no
output because the input element cannot fill the window (unless we add another column of
padding).
Cross-correlation with strides of 3 and 2 for height and width, respectively.
In general, when the stride for the height is 𝑠h and the stride for the width is 𝑠w, the output
shape is
(𝑛h − 𝑘h + 𝑝h + 𝑠h)/𝑠h × (𝑛w − 𝑘w + 𝑝w +𝑠w)/𝑠w .
(7.3.2)
If we set 𝑝h = 𝑘h −1 and 𝑝w = 𝑘w −1, then the output shape can be simplified to (𝑛h +
251
Padding and Stride
𝑠h − 1)/𝑠h × (𝑛w + 𝑠w −1)/𝑠w . Going a step further, if the input height and width are
divisible by the strides on the height and width, then the output shape will be (𝑛h/𝑠h) ×
(𝑛w/𝑠w).
Below, we set the strides on both the height and width to 2, thus halving the input height
and width.
conv2d = nn.LazyConv2d(1, kernel_size=3, padding=1, stride=2)
comp_conv2d(conv2d, X).shape
torch.Size([4, 4])
Let’s look at a slightly more complicated example.
conv2d = nn.LazyConv2d(1, kernel_size=(3, 5), padding=(0, 1), stride=(3, 4))
comp_conv2d(conv2d, X).shape
torch.Size([2, 2])
7.3.3 Summary and Discussion
Padding can increase the height and width of the output. This is often used to give the
output the same height and width as the input to avoid undesirable shrinkage of the output.
Moreover, itensuresthatall pixelsare usedequallyfrequently. Typicallywepicksymmetric
padding on both sides of the input height and width. In this case we refer to (𝑝h, 𝑝w)
padding. Most commonly we set 𝑝h = 𝑝w, in which case we simply state that we choose
padding 𝑝.
A similar convention applies to strides. When horizontal stride 𝑠h and vertical stride 𝑠w
match, we simply talk about stride 𝑠. The stride can reduce the resolution of the output, for
example reducing the height and width of the output to only 1/𝑛 of the height and width of
the input for 𝑛 > 1. By default, the padding is 0 and the stride is 1.
So far all padding that we discussed simply extended images with zeros. This has signif
icant computational benefit since it is trivial to accomplish. Moreover, operators can be
engineered to take advantage of this padding implicitly without the need to allocate addi
tional memory. At the same time, it allows CNNs to encode implicit position information
within an image, simplybylearningwherethe“whitespace”is. Therearemanyalternatives
to zero-padding. Alsallakh et al. (2020) provided an extensive overview of those (albeit
without a clear case for when to use nonzero paddings unless artifacts occur).
7.3.4 Exercises
1. Given the final code example in this section with kernel size (3,5), padding (0,1), and
stride (3, 4), calculate the output shape to check if it is consistent with the experimental
result.
252
Convolutional Neural Networks
121
2. For audio signals, what does a stride of 2 correspond to?
3. Implement mirror padding, i.e., padding where the border values are simply mirrored
to extend tensors.
4. What are the computational benefits of a stride larger than 1?
5. What might be statistical benefits of a stride larger than 1?
6. Howwouldyouimplementastride of 1
2? What does it correspond to? When would this
be useful?
Discussions121.
7.4 Multiple Input and Multiple Output Channels
While we described the multiple channels that comprise each image (e.g., color images
have the standard RGB channels to indicate the amount of red, green and blue) and con
volutional layers for multiple channels in Section 7.1.4, until now, we simplified all of our
numerical examples by working with just a single input and a single output channel. This
allowed us to think of our inputs, convolution kernels, and outputs each as two-dimensional
tensors.
When we add channels into the mix, our inputs and hidden representations both become
three-dimensional tensors. For example, each RGB input image has shape 3 × ℎ × 𝑤. We
refer to this axis, with a size of 3, as the channel dimension. The notion of channels is
as old as CNNs themselves: for instance LeNet-5 (LeCun et al., 1995) uses them. In this
section, we will take a deeper look at convolution kernels with multiple input and multiple
output channels.
import torch
from d2l import torch as d2l
7.4.1 Multiple Input Channels
When the input data contains multiple channels, we need to construct a convolution kernel
with the same number of input channels as the input data, so that it can perform cross
correlation with the input data. Assuming that the number of channels for the input data
is 𝑐i, the number of input channels of the convolution kernel also needs to be 𝑐i. If our
convolution kernel’s window shape is 𝑘h × 𝑘w, then, when 𝑐i = 1, we can think of our
convolution kernel as just a two-dimensional tensor of shape 𝑘h × 𝑘w.
However, when 𝑐i > 1, we need a kernel that contains a tensor of shape 𝑘h × 𝑘w for ev
ery input channel. Concatenating these 𝑐i tensors together yields a convolution kernel of
shape 𝑐i × 𝑘h × 𝑘w. Since the input and convolution kernel each have 𝑐i channels, we can
253
Multiple Input and Multiple Output Channels
Fig. 7.4.1
perform a cross-correlation operation on the two-dimensional tensor of the input and the
two-dimensional tensor of the convolution kernel for each channel, adding the 𝑐i results
together (summing over the channels) to yield a two-dimensional tensor. This is the result
of a two-dimensional cross-correlation between a multi-channel input and a multi-input
channel convolution kernel.
Fig. 7.4.1 provides an example of a two-dimensional cross-correlation with two input chan
nels. The shaded portions are the first output element as well as the input and kernel tensor
elements used for the output computation: (1 ×1+2×2+4×3+5×4) + (0×0+1×1+
3 ×2+4×3) =56.
Cross-correlation computation with two input channels.
Tomakesurewe reallyunderstandwhat isgoingonhere,wecanimplementcross-correlation
operations with multiple input channels ourselves. Notice that all we are doing is perform
ing a cross-correlation operation per channel and then adding up the results.
def corr2d_multi_in(X, K):
# Iterate through the 0th dimension (channel) of K first, then add them up
return sum(d2l.corr2d(x, k) for x, k in zip(X, K))
We can construct the input tensor X and the kernel tensor K corresponding to the values in
Fig. 7.4.1 to validate the output of the cross-correlation operation.
X = torch.tensor([[[0.0, 1.0, 2.0], [3.0, 4.0, 5.0], [6.0, 7.0, 8.0]],
[[1.0, 2.0, 3.0], [4.0, 5.0, 6.0], [7.0, 8.0, 9.0]]])
K = torch.tensor([[[0.0, 1.0], [2.0, 3.0]], [[1.0, 2.0], [3.0, 4.0]]])
corr2d_multi_in(X, K)
tensor([[ 56., 72.],
[104., 120.]])
7.4.2 Multiple Output Channels
Regardless of the number of input channels, so far we always ended up with one output
channel. However, as we discussed in Section 7.1.4, it turns out to be essential to have
multiple channels at each layer. In the most popular neural network architectures, we actu
ally increase the channel dimension as we go deeper in the neural network, typically down
sampling to trade off spatial resolution for greater channel depth. Intuitively, you could
254
Convolutional Neural Networks
think of each channel as responding to a different set of features. The reality is a bit more
complicated than this. A naiveinterpretation would suggest that representations are learned
independently per pixel or per channel. Instead, channels are optimized to be jointly useful.
This means that rather than mapping a single channel to an edge detector, it may simply
mean that some direction in channel space corresponds to detecting edges.
Denoteby𝑐i and 𝑐o the number of input and output channels, respectively, andby 𝑘h and 𝑘w
the height and width of the kernel. To get an output with multiple channels, we can create
a kernel tensor of shape 𝑐i ×𝑘h ×𝑘w for every output channel. We concatenate them on the
output channel dimension, so that the shape of the convolution kernel is 𝑐o × 𝑐i × 𝑘h × 𝑘w.
In cross-correlation operations, the result on each output channel is calculated from the
convolution kernel corresponding to that output channel and takes input from all channels
in the input tensor.
We implement a cross-correlation function to calculate the output of multiple channels as
shown below.
def corr2d_multi_in_out(X, K):
# Iterate through the 0th dimension of K, and each time, perform
# cross-correlation operations with input X. All of the results are
# stacked together
return torch.stack([corr2d_multi_in(X, k) for k in K], 0)
We construct a trivial convolution kernel with three output channels by concatenating the
kernel tensor for K with K+1 and K+2.
K = torch.stack((K, K + 1, K + 2), 0)
K.shape
torch.Size([3, 2, 2, 2])
Below, we perform cross-correlation operations on the input tensor X with the kernel tensor
K. Nowthe output contains three channels. The result of the first channel is consistent with
the result of the previous input tensor X and the multi-input channel, single-output channel
kernel.
corr2d_multi_in_out(X, K)
tensor([[[ 56., 72.],
[104., 120.]],
[[ 76., 100.],
[148., 172.]],
[[ 96., 128.],
[192., 224.]]])
255
Multiple Input and Multiple Output Channels
Fig. 7.4.2
7.4.3 1 × 1 Convolutional Layer
At first, a 1 × 1 convolution, i.e., 𝑘h = 𝑘w = 1, does not seem to make much sense.
After all, a convolution correlates adjacent pixels. A 1 × 1 convolution obviously does
not. Nonetheless, they are popular operations that are sometimes included in the designs
of complex deep networks (Lin et al., 2013, Szegedy et al., 2017). Let’s see in some detail
what it actually does.
Because the minimum window is used, the 1×1 convolution loses the ability of larger con
volutional layers to recognize patterns consisting of interactions among adjacent elements
in the height and width dimensions. The only computation of the 1×1 convolution occurs
on the channel dimension.
Fig. 7.4.2 shows the cross-correlation computation using the 1×1 convolution kernel with 3
input channels and 2 output channels. Note that the inputs and outputs have the same height
and width. Each element in the output is derived from a linear combination of elements at
the same position in the input image. You could think of the 1 × 1 convolutional layer as
constituting a fully connected layer applied at every single pixel location to transform the
𝑐i corresponding input values into 𝑐o output values. Because this is still a convolutional
layer, the weights are tied across pixel location. Thus the 1×1 convolutional layer requires
𝑐o × 𝑐i weights (plus the bias). Also note that convolutional layers are typically followed
by nonlinearities. This ensures that 1 × 1 convolutions cannot simply be folded into other
convolutions.
The cross-correlation computation uses the 1 × 1 convolution kernel with three input
channels and two output channels. The input and output have the same height and width.
Let’s check whether this works in practice: we implement a 1×1 convolution using a fully
connected layer. The only thing is that we need to make some adjustments to the data shape
before and after the matrix multiplication.
def corr2d_multi_in_out_1x1(X, K):
c_i, h, w = X.shape
c_o = K.shape[0]
X = X.reshape((c_i, h * w))
K = K.reshape((c_o, c_i))
# Matrix multiplication in the fully connected layer
Y = torch.matmul(K, X)
return Y.reshape((c_o, h, w))
When performing 1×1 convolutions, the above function is equivalent to the previously im
plemented cross-correlation function corr2d_multi_in_out. Let’s check this with some
sample data.
256
Convolutional Neural Networks
X = torch.normal(0, 1, (3, 3, 3))
K = torch.normal(0, 1, (2, 3, 1, 1))
Y1 = corr2d_multi_in_out_1x1(X, K)
Y2 = corr2d_multi_in_out(X, K)
assert float(torch.abs(Y1- Y2).sum()) < 1e-6
7.4.4 Discussion
Channels allow us to combine the best of both worlds: MLPs that allow for significant
nonlinearities and convolutions that allow for localized analysis of features. In particular,
channels allow the CNN to reason with multiple features, such as edge and shape detec
tors at the same time. They also offer a practical trade-off between the drastic parameter
reduction arising from translation invariance and locality, and the need for expressive and
diverse models in computer vision.
Note, though, that this flexibility comes at a price. Given an image of size (ℎ×𝑤), the cost
for computing a 𝑘 ×𝑘 convolution is O(ℎ·𝑤 · 𝑘2). For 𝑐i and 𝑐o input and output channels
respectively this increases to O(ℎ · 𝑤 · 𝑘2 · 𝑐i · 𝑐o). For a 256 × 256 pixel image with a
5×5kernel and 128 input and output channels respectively this amounts to over 53 billion
operations (we count multiplications and additions separately). Later on we will encounter
effective strategies to cut down on the cost, e.g., by requiring the channel-wise operations
to be block-diagonal, leading to architectures such as ResNeXt (Xie et al., 2017).
7.4.5 Exercises
1. Assume that we have two convolution kernels of size 𝑘1 and 𝑘2, respectively (with no
nonlinearity in between).
1. Prove that the result of the operation can be expressed by a single convolution.
2. What is the dimensionality of the equivalent single convolution?
3. Is the converse true, i.e., can you always decompose a convolution into two smaller
ones?
2. Assumeaninput of shape 𝑐i×ℎ×𝑤 andaconvolution kernel of shape 𝑐o×𝑐i×𝑘h×𝑘w,
padding of (𝑝h, 𝑝w), and stride of (𝑠h, 𝑠w).
1. What is the computational cost (multiplications and additions) for the forward prop
agation?
2. What is the memory footprint?
3. What is the memory footprint for the backward computation?
4. What is the computational cost for the backpropagation?
3. By what factor does the number of calculations increase if we double both the number
of input channels 𝑐i and the number of output channels 𝑐o? What happens if we double
the padding?
257
Pooling
122
4. Are the variables Y1 and Y2 in the final example of this section exactly the same? Why?
5. Express convolutions as a matrix multiplication, even when the convolution window is
not 1 ×1.
6. Your task is to implement fast convolutions with a 𝑘 × 𝑘 kernel. One of the algorithm
candidates is to scan horizontally across the source, reading a 𝑘-wide strip and comput
ing the 1-wide output strip one value at a time. The alternative is to read a 𝑘 + Δ wide
strip and compute a Δ-wide output strip. Why is the latter preferable? Is there a limit to
how large you should choose Δ?
7. Assume that we have a 𝑐 × 𝑐 matrix.
1. Howmuchfasterisit to multiply with a block-diagonal matrix if the matrix is broken
up into 𝑏 blocks?
2. What is the downside of having 𝑏 blocks? How could you fix it, at least partly?
Discussions122.
7.5 Pooling
In many cases our ultimate task asks some global question about the image, e.g., does it
contain a cat? Consequently, the units of our final layer should be sensitive to the entire
input. By gradually aggregating information, yielding coarser and coarser maps, we ac
complish this goal of ultimately learning a global representation, while keeping all of the
advantages of convolutional layers at the intermediate layers of processing. The deeper
we go in the network, the larger the receptive field (relative to the input) to which each
hidden node is sensitive. Reducing spatial resolution accelerates this process, since the
convolution kernels cover a larger effective area.
Moreover, when detecting lower-level features, such as edges (as discussed in Section 7.2),
we often want our representations to be somewhat invariant to translation. For instance,
if we take the image X with a sharp delineation between black and white and shift the
whole image by one pixel to the right, i.e., Z[i, j] = X[i, j + 1], then the output
for the new image Z might be vastly different. The edge will have shifted by one pixel. In
reality, objects hardly ever occur exactly at the same place. In fact, even with a tripod and
a stationary object, vibration of the camera due to the movement of the shutter might shift
everything by a pixel or so (high-end cameras are loaded with special features to address
this problem).
This section introduces pooling layers, which serve the dual purposes of mitigating the
sensitivity of convolutional layers to location and of spatially downsampling representa
tions.
258
Convolutional Neural Networks
Fig. 7.5.1
import torch
from torch import nn
from d2l import torch as d2l
7.5.1 Maximum Pooling and Average Pooling
Like convolutional layers, pooling operators consist of a fixed-shape window that is slid
over all regions in the input according to its stride, computing a single output for each lo
cation traversed by the fixed-shape window (sometimes known as the pooling window).
However, unlike the cross-correlation computation of the inputs and kernels in the con
volutional layer, the pooling layer contains no parameters (there is no kernel). Instead,
pooling operators are deterministic, typically calculating either the maximum or the aver
age value of the elements in the pooling window. These operations are called maximum
pooling (max-pooling for short) and average pooling, respectively.
Average pooling is essentially as old as CNNs. The idea is akin to downsampling an image.
Rather than just taking the value of every second (or third) pixel for the lower resolution
image, we can average over adjacent pixels to obtain an image with better signal-to-noise
ratio since we are combining the information from multiple adjacent pixels. Max-pooling
was introduced in Riesenhuber and Poggio (1999) in the context of cognitive neuroscience
to describe how information aggregation might be aggregated hierarchically for the purpose
of objectrecognition; therealreadywasanearlierversioninspeechrecognition(Yamaguchi
et al., 1990). In almost all cases, max-pooling, as it is also referred to, is preferable to
average pooling.
In both cases, as with the cross-correlation operator, we can think of the pooling window
as starting from the upper-left of the input tensor and sliding across it from left to right and
top to bottom. At each location that the pooling window hits, it computes the maximum or
average value of the input subtensor in the window, depending on whether max or average
pooling is employed.
Max-pooling with a pooling window shape of 2 × 2. The shaded portions are the first
output element as well as the input tensor elements used for the output computation:
max(0,1,3,4) = 4.
The output tensor in Fig. 7.5.1 has a height of 2 and a width of 2. The four elements are
259
Pooling
derived from the maximum value in each pooling window:
max(0,1,3,4) = 4,
max(1,2,4,5) = 5,
max(3,4,6,7) = 7,
max(4,5,7,8) = 8.
(7.5.1)
More generally, we can define a 𝑝 × 𝑞 pooling layer by aggregating over a region of said
size. Returning to the problem of edge detection, we use the output of the convolutional
layer as input for 2×2 max-pooling. Denote by X the input of the convolutional layer input
and Y the pooling layer output. Regardless of whether or not the values of X[i, j], X[i,
j + 1], X[i+1, j] and X[i+1, j + 1] are different, the pooling layer always outputs
Y[i, j] = 1. That is to say, using the 2 × 2 max-pooling layer, we can still detect if the
pattern recognized by the convolutional layer moves no more than one element in height or
width.
In the code below, weimplementtheforwardpropagationofthepoolinglayerinthepool2d
function. This function is similar to the corr2d function in Section 7.2. However, no kernel
is needed, computing the output as either the maximum or the average of each region in the
input.
def pool2d(X, pool_size, mode='max'):
p_h, p_w = pool_size
Y = torch.zeros((X.shape[0]- p_h + 1, X.shape[1]- p_w + 1))
for i in range(Y.shape[0]):
for j in range(Y.shape[1]):
if mode == 'max':
Y[i, j] = X[i: i + p_h, j: j + p_w].max()
elif mode == 'avg':
Y[i, j] = X[i: i + p_h, j: j + p_w].mean()
return Y
Wecanconstruct the input tensorXinFig.7.5.1tovalidatetheoutputofthetwo-dimensional
max-pooling layer.
X = torch.tensor([[0.0, 1.0, 2.0], [3.0, 4.0, 5.0], [6.0, 7.0, 8.0]])
pool2d(X, (2, 2))
tensor([[4., 5.],
[7., 8.]])
Also, we can experiment with the average pooling layer.
pool2d(X, (2, 2), 'avg')
tensor([[2., 3.],
[5., 6.]])
260
Convolutional Neural Networks
7.5.2 Padding and Stride
As withconvolutional layers, pooling layers change the output shape. Andasbefore, wecan
adjust the operation to achieve a desired output shape by padding the input and adjusting the
stride. We can demonstrate the use of padding and strides in pooling layers via the built-in
two-dimensional max-pooling layer from the deep learning framework. We first construct
an input tensor X whose shape has four dimensions, where the number of examples (batch
size) and number of channels are both 1.
X = torch.arange(16, dtype=torch.float32).reshape((1, 1, 4, 4))
X
tensor([[[[ 0., 1., 2., 3.],
[ 4., 5., 6., 7.],
[ 8., 9., 10., 11.],
[12., 13., 14., 15.]]]])
Since pooling aggregates information from an area, deep learning frameworks default to
matching pooling window sizes and stride. For instance, if we use a pooling window of
shape (3, 3) we get a stride shape of (3, 3) by default.
pool2d = nn.MaxPool2d(3)
# Pooling has no model parameters, hence it needs no initialization
pool2d(X)
tensor([[[[10.]]]])
Needless to say, the stride and padding can be manually specified to override framework
defaults if required.
pool2d = nn.MaxPool2d(3, padding=1, stride=2)
pool2d(X)
tensor([[[[ 5., 7.],
[13., 15.]]]])
Of course, we can specify an arbitrary rectangular pooling window with arbitrary height
and width respectively, as the example below shows.
pool2d = nn.MaxPool2d((2, 3), stride=(2, 3), padding=(0, 1))
pool2d(X)
tensor([[[[ 5., 7.],
[13., 15.]]]])
261
Pooling
7.5.3 Multiple Channels
When processing multi-channel input data, the pooling layer pools each input channel sep
arately, rather than summing the inputs up over channels as in a convolutional layer. This
means that the number of output channels for the pooling layer is the same as the number of
input channels. Below, we will concatenate tensors X and X + 1 on the channel dimension
to construct an input with two channels.
X = torch.cat((X, X + 1), 1)
X
tensor([[[[ 0., 1., 2., 3.],
[ 4., 5., 6., 7.],
[ 8., 9., 10., 11.],
[12., 13., 14., 15.]],
[[ 1., 2., 3., 4.],
[ 5., 6., 7., 8.],
[ 9., 10., 11., 12.],
[13., 14., 15., 16.]]]])
As we can see, the number of output channels is still two after pooling.
pool2d = nn.MaxPool2d(3, padding=1, stride=2)
pool2d(X)
tensor([[[[ 5., 7.],
[13., 15.]],
[[ 6., 8.],
[14., 16.]]]])
7.5.4 Summary
Pooling is an exceedingly simple operation. It does exactly what its name indicates, ag
gregate results over a window of values. All convolution semantics, such as strides and
padding apply in the same way as they did previously. Note that pooling is indifferent to
channels, i.e., it leaves the number of channels unchanged and it applies to each channel
separately. Lastly, of the two popular pooling choices, max-pooling is preferable to average
pooling, as it confers some degree of invariance to output. A popular choice is to pick a
pooling window size of 2 × 2 to quarter the spatial resolution of output.
Note that there are many more ways of reducing resolution beyond pooling. For instance, in
stochastic pooling (Zeiler and Fergus, 2013) and fractional max-pooling (Graham, 2014)
aggregation is combined with randomization. This can slightly improve the accuracy in
some cases. Lastly, as we will see later with the attention mechanism, there are more
refined ways of aggregating over outputs, e.g., by using the alignment between a query and
representation vectors.
262
Convolutional Neural Networks
123
7.5.5 Exercises
1. Implement average pooling through a convolution.
2. Prove that max-pooling cannot be implemented through a convolution alone.
3. Max-pooling can be accomplished using ReLU operations, i.e., ReLU(𝑥) = max(0,𝑥).
1. Express max(𝑎,𝑏) by using only ReLU operations.
2. Use this to implement max-pooling by means of convolutions and ReLU layers.
3. Howmany channels and layers do you need for a 2 × 2 convolution? How many for
a 3×3 convolution?
4. Whatisthecomputationalcostofthepoolinglayer? Assumethattheinputtothepooling
layer is of size 𝑐 × ℎ ×𝑤, the pooling window has a shape of 𝑝h × 𝑝w with a padding of
(𝑝h, 𝑝w) and a stride of (𝑠h, 𝑠w).
5. Whydoyou expect max-pooling and average pooling to work differently?
6. Doweneed a separate minimum pooling layer? Can you replace it with another opera
tion?
7. Wecould use the softmax operation for pooling. Why might it not be so popular?
Discussions123.
7.6 Convolutional Neural Networks (LeNet)
We now have all the ingredients required to assemble a fully-functional CNN. In our earlier
encounter with image data, we applied a linear model with softmax regression (Section 4.4)
and an MLP (Section 5.2) to pictures of clothing in the Fashion-MNIST dataset. To make
such data amenable we first flattened each image from a 28 × 28 matrix into a fixed-length
784-dimensional vector, and thereafter processed them in fully connected layers. Now that
we have a handle on convolutional layers, we can retain the spatial structure in our images.
As an additional benefit of replacing fully connected layers with convolutional layers, we
will enjoy more parsimonious models that require far fewer parameters.
In this section, we will introduce LeNet, among the first published CNNs to capture wide
attention for its performance on computer vision tasks. The model was introduced by (and
named for) Yann LeCun, then a researcher at AT&T Bell Labs, for the purpose of rec
ognizing handwritten digits in images (LeCun et al., 1998). This work represented the
culmination of a decade of research developing the technology; LeCun’s team published
the first study to successfully train CNNs via backpropagation (LeCun et al., 1989).
At the time LeNet achieved outstanding results matching the performance of support vector
machines, then a dominant approach in supervised learning, achieving an error rate of less
263
Convolutional Neural Networks (LeNet)
Fig. 7.6.1
than 1%perdigit. LeNet waseventually adapted to recognize digits for processing deposits
in ATM machines. To this day, some ATMs still run the code that Yann LeCun and his
colleague Leon Bottou wrote in the 1990s!
import torch
from torch import nn
from d2l import torch as d2l
7.6.1 LeNet
At a high level, LeNet (LeNet-5) consists of two parts: (i) a convolutional encoder consist
ing of two convolutional layers; and (ii) a dense block consisting of three fully connected
layers. The architecture is summarized in Fig. 7.6.1.
Data flow in LeNet. The input is a handwritten digit, the output is a probability over 10
possible outcomes.
The basic units in each convolutional block are a convolutional layer, a sigmoid activation
function, and a subsequent average pooling operation. Note that while ReLUs and max
pooling work better, they had not yet been discovered. Each convolutional layer uses a 5×5
kernel and a sigmoid activation function. These layers map spatially arranged inputs to a
number of two-dimensional feature maps, typically increasing the number of channels. The
first convolutional layer has 6 output channels, while the second has 16. Each 2×2 pooling
operation (stride 2) reduces dimensionality by a factor of 4 via spatial downsampling. The
convolutional block emits an output with shape given by (batch size, number of channel,
height, width).
In order to pass output from the convolutional block to the dense block, wemustflatteneach
example in the minibatch. Inotherwords, wetakethisfour-dimensionalinputandtransform
it into the two-dimensional input expected by fully connected layers: as a reminder, the two
dimensional representation that we desire uses the first dimension to index examples in the
minibatch and the second to give the flat vector representation of each example. LeNet’s
dense block has three fully connected layers, with 120, 84, and 10 outputs, respectively.
Because we are still performing classification, the 10-dimensional output layer corresponds
to the number of possible output classes.
264
Convolutional Neural Networks
Fig. 7.6.2
While getting to the point where you truly understand what is going on inside LeNet may
have taken a bit of work, we hope that the following code snippet will convince you that
implementing such models with modern deep learning frameworks is remarkably simple.
We need only to instantiate a Sequential block and chain together the appropriate layers,
using Xavier initialization as introduced in Section 5.4.2.
def init_cnn(module): #@save
"""Initialize weights for CNNs."""
if type(module) == nn.Linear or type(module) == nn.Conv2d:
nn.init.xavier_uniform_(module.weight)
class LeNet(d2l.Classifier): #@save
"""The LeNet-5 model."""
def __init__(self, lr=0.1, num_classes=10):
super().__init__()
self.save_hyperparameters()
self.net = nn.Sequential(
nn.LazyConv2d(6, kernel_size=5, padding=2), nn.Sigmoid(),
nn.AvgPool2d(kernel_size=2, stride=2),
nn.LazyConv2d(16, kernel_size=5), nn.Sigmoid(),
nn.AvgPool2d(kernel_size=2, stride=2),
nn.Flatten(),
nn.LazyLinear(120), nn.Sigmoid(),
nn.LazyLinear(84), nn.Sigmoid(),
nn.LazyLinear(num_classes))
We have taken some liberty in the reproduction of LeNet insofar as we have replaced the
Gaussian activation layer by a softmax layer. This greatly simplifies the implementation,
not least due to the fact that the Gaussian decoder is rarely used nowadays. Other than that,
this network matches the original LeNet-5 architecture.
Let’s see what happens inside the network. By passing a single-channel (black and white)
28×28imagethroughthenetworkandprintingtheoutputshapeateachlayer,wecaninspect
the model to ensure that its operations line up with what we expect from Fig. 7.6.2.
Compressed notation for LeNet-5.
265
Convolutional Neural Networks (LeNet)
@d2l.add_to_class(d2l.Classifier) #@save
def layer_summary(self, X_shape):
X = torch.randn(*X_shape)
for layer in self.net:
X = layer(X)
print(layer.__class__.__name__, 'output shape:\t', X.shape)
model = LeNet()
model.layer_summary((1, 1, 28, 28))
Conv2d output shape:
Sigmoid output shape:
AvgPool2d output shape:
Conv2d output shape:
Sigmoid output shape:
AvgPool2d output shape:
Flatten output shape:
Linear output shape:
Sigmoid output shape:
Linear output shape:
Sigmoid output shape:
torch.Size([1, 6, 28, 28])
torch.Size([1, 6, 28, 28])
torch.Size([1, 6, 14, 14])
torch.Size([1, 16, 10, 10])
torch.Size([1, 16, 10, 10])
torch.Size([1, 16, 5, 5])
torch.Size([1, 400])
torch.Size([1, 120])
torch.Size([1, 120])
torch.Size([1, 84])
torch.Size([1, 84])
Linear output shape:
torch.Size([1, 10])
Note that the height and width of the representation at each layer throughout the convolu
tional block is reduced (compared with the previous layer). The first convolutional layer
uses two pixels of padding to compensate for the reduction in height and width that would
otherwise result from using a 5 ×5 kernel. As an aside, the image size of 28×28 pixels in
the original MNIST OCR dataset is a result of trimming two pixel rows (and columns) from
the original scans that measured 32 × 32 pixels. This was done primarily to save space (a
30% reduction) at a time when megabytes mattered.
In contrast, the second convolutional layer forgoes padding, and thus the height and width
are both reduced by four pixels. As we go up the stack of layers, the number of channels
increases layer-over-layer from 1 in the input to 6 after the first convolutional layer and
16 after the second convolutional layer. However, each pooling layer halves the height and
width. Finally, each fully connected layer reduces dimensionality, finally emitting an output
whose dimension matches the number of classes.
7.6.2 Training
Now that we have implemented the model, let’s run an experiment to see how the LeNet-5
model fares on Fashion-MNIST.
While CNNs have fewer parameters, they can still be more expensive to compute than
similarly deep MLPs because each parameter participates in many more multiplications.
If you have access to a GPU, this might be a good time to put it into action to speed up
training. Note that the d2l.Trainer class takes care of all details. By default, it initializes
the model parameters on the available devices. Just as with MLPs, our loss function is
cross-entropy, and we minimize it via minibatch stochastic gradient descent.
266
Convolutional Neural Networks
trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10, num_gpus=1)
data = d2l.FashionMNIST(batch_size=128)
model = LeNet(lr=0.1)
model.apply_init([next(iter(data.get_dataloader(True)))[0]], init_cnn)
trainer.fit(model, data)
7.6.3 Summary
We have made significant progress in this chapter. We moved from the MLPs of the 1980s
to the CNNs of the 1990s and early 2000s. The architectures proposed, e.g., in the form
of LeNet-5 remain meaningful, even to this day. It is worth comparing the error rates on
Fashion-MNISTachievablewithLeNet-5both to theverybest possiblewithMLPs(Section
5.2) and those with significantly more advanced architectures such as ResNet (Section 8.6).
LeNet is much more similar to the latter than to the former. One of the primary differences,
as we shall see, is that greater amounts of computation enabled significantly more complex
architectures.
A second difference is the relative ease with whichwewere able to implement LeNet. What
used to be an engineering challenge worth months of C++ and assembly code, engineering
to improve SN, an early Lisp-based deep learning tool (Bottou and Le Cun, 1988), and fi
nally experimentation with models can nowbeaccomplished inminutes. Itisthisincredible
productivity boost that has democratized deep learning model development tremendously.
In the next chapter we will journey down this rabbit to hole to see where it takes us.
7.6.4 Exercises
1. Let’s modernize LeNet. Implement and test the following changes:
1. Replace average pooling with max-pooling.
2. Replace the softmax layer with ReLU.
2. Try to change the size of the LeNet style network to improve its accuracy in addition to
max-pooling and ReLU.
1. Adjust the convolution window size.
2. Adjust the number of output channels.
267
Convolutional Neural Networks (LeNet)
124
3. Adjust the number of convolution layers.
4. Adjust the number of fully connected layers.
5. Adjust the learning rates and other training details (e.g., initialization and number of
epochs).
3. Try out the improved network on the original MNIST dataset.
4. Display the activations of the first and second layer of LeNet for different inputs (e.g.,
sweaters and coats).
5. What happens to the activations when you feed significantly different images into the
network (e.g., cats, cars, or even random noise)?
Discussions124.
