8
Modern Convolutional Neural Networks
125
268
Now that we understand the basics of wiring together CNNs, let’s take a tour of modern
CNN architectures. This tour is, by necessity, incomplete, thanks to the plethora of excit
ing new designs being added. Their importance derives from the fact that not only can they
be used directly for vision tasks, but they also serve as basic feature generators for more
advanced tasks such as tracking (Zhang et al., 2021), segmentation (Long et al., 2015), ob
ject detection (Redmon and Farhadi, 2018), or style transformation (Gatys et al., 2016). In
this chapter, most sections correspond to a significant CNN architecture that was at some
point (or currently) the base model upon which many research projects and deployed sys
tems werebuilt. Each of these networks was briefly a dominant architecture and many were
winners or runners-up in the ImageNet competition125 which has served as a barometer
of progress on supervised learning in computer vision since 2010. It is only recently that
Transformers have begun to displace CNNs, starting with Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) and
followed by the Swin Transformer (Liu et al., 2021). We will cover this development later
in Chapter 11.
While the idea of deep neural networks is quite simple (stack together a bunch of layers),
performance can vary wildly across architectures and hyperparameter choices. The neural
networks described in this chapter are the product of intuition, a few mathematical insights,
and a lot of trial and error. We present these models in chronological order, partly to convey
a sense of the history so that you can form your own intuitions about where the field is
heading and perhaps develop your own architectures. Forinstance, batch normalization and
residual connections described in this chapter have offered two popular ideas for training
and designing deep models, both of which have since also been applied to architectures
beyond computer vision.
We begin our tour of modern CNNs with AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), the first large
scale network deployed to beat conventional computer vision methods on a large-scale vi
sion challenge; the VGG network (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014), which makes use of a
number of repeating blocks ofelements; thenetworkinnetwork(NiN)thatconvolveswhole
neural networks patch-wise over inputs (Lin et al., 2013); GoogLeNet that uses networks
with multi-branch convolutions (Szegedy et al., 2015); the residual network (ResNet) (He
et al., 2016), which remains one of the most popular off-the-shelf architectures in computer
vision; ResNeXt blocks (Xie et al., 2017) for sparser connections; and DenseNet (Huang
et al., 2017) for a generalization of the residual architecture. Over time many special opti
mizations for efficient networks have been developed, such as coordinate shifts (ShiftNet)
(Wu et al., 2018). This culminated in the automatic search for efficient architectures such
269
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (AlexNet)
as MobileNet v3 (Howard et al., 2019). It also includes the semi-automatic design explo
ration of Radosavovic et al. (2020) that led to the RegNetX/Y which we will discuss later
in this chapter. The work is instructive insofar as it offers a path for marrying brute force
computation with the ingenuity of an experimenter in the search for efficient design spaces.
Of note is also the work of Liu et al. (2022) as it shows that training techniques (e.g., op
timizers, data augmentation, and regularization) play a pivotal role in improving accuracy.
It also shows that long-held assumptions, such as the size of a convolution window, may
need to be revisited, given the increase in computation and data. We will cover this and
many more questions in due course throughout this chapter.
8.1 Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (AlexNet)
Although CNNs were well known in the computer vision and machine learning commu
nities following the introduction of LeNet (LeCun et al., 1995), they did not immediately
dominate the field. Although LeNet achieved good results on early small datasets, the per
formance and feasibility of training CNNs on larger, more realistic datasets had yet to be
established. In fact, for much of the intervening time between the early 1990s and the wa
tershed results of 2012 (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), neural networks were often surpassed
by other machine learning methods, such as kernel methods (Schölkopf and Smola, 2002),
ensemble methods (Freund and Schapire, 1996), and structured estimation (Taskar et al.,
2004).
For computer vision, this comparison is perhaps not entirely accurate. That is, although
the inputs to convolutional networks consist of raw or lightly-processed (e.g., by center
ing) pixel values, practitioners would never feed raw pixels into traditional models. In
stead, typical computer vision pipelines consisted of manually engineering feature extrac
tion pipelines, such as SIFT (Lowe, 2004), SURF (Bay et al., 2006), and bags of visual
words (Sivic and Zisserman, 2003). Rather than learning the features, the features were
crafted. Most of the progress came from having more clever ideas for feature extraction on
the one hand and deep insight into geometry (Hartley and Zisserman, 2000) on the other.
The learning algorithm was often considered an afterthought.
Although some neural network accelerators were available in the 1990s, they were not yet
sufficiently powerful to make deep multichannel, multilayer CNNs with a large number
of parameters. For instance, NVIDIA’s GeForce 256 from 1999 was able to process at
most 480 million floating-point operations, such as additions and multiplications, per sec
ond (MFLOPS), without any meaningful programming framework for operations beyond
games. Today’s accelerators are able to perform in excess of 1000 TFLOPs per device.
Moreover, datasets were still relatively small: OCR on 60,000 low-resolution 28×28 pixel
images was considered a highly challenging task. Added to these obstacles, key tricks for
training neural networks including parameter initialization heuristics (Glorot and Bengio,
2010), clever variants of stochastic gradient descent (KingmaandBa, 2014), non-squashing
270
Modern Convolutional Neural Networks
126
activation functions (Nair and Hinton, 2010), and effective regularization techniques (Sri
vastava et al., 2014) were still missing.
Thus, rather than training end-to-end (pixel to classification) systems, classical pipelines
looked more like this:
1. Obtain an interesting dataset. In the early days, these datasets required expensive sen
sors. For instance, the Apple QuickTake 100 126 of 1994 sported a whopping 0.3
megapixel(VGA)resolution, capableofstoringupto8images,allforthepriceof$1000.
2. Preprocess the dataset with hand-crafted features based on some knowledge of optics,
geometry, other analytic tools, and occasionally on the serendipitous discoveries by
lucky graduate students.
3. Feed the data through a standard set of feature extractors such as the SIFT (scale
invariant feature transform) (Lowe, 2004), the SURF (speeded up robust features) (Bay
et al., 2006), or any number of other hand-tuned pipelines. OpenCV still provides SIFT
extractors to this day!
4. Dumpthe resulting representations into your favorite classifier, likely a linear model or
kernel method, to train a classifier.
If you spoke to machine learning researchers, they would reply that machine learning was
both important and beautiful. Elegant theories proved the properties of various classifiers
(Boucheron et al., 2005) and convex optimization (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004) had
become the mainstay for obtaining them. The field of machine learning was thriving, rig
orous, and eminently useful. However, if you spoke to a computer vision researcher, you
would hear a very different story. The dirty truth of image recognition, they would tell
you, is that features, geometry (Hartley and Zisserman, 2000, Hartley and Kahl, 2009),
and engineering, rather than novel learning algorithms, drove progress. Computer vision
researchers justifiably believed that a slightly bigger or cleaner dataset or a slightly im
proved feature-extraction pipeline mattered far more to the final accuracy than any learning
algorithm.
import torch
from torch import nn
from d2l import torch as d2l
8.1.1 Representation Learning
Another way to cast the state of affairs is that the most important part of the pipeline was the
representation. And up until 2012 the representation was calculated mostly mechanically.
In fact, engineering a new set of feature functions, improving results, and writing up the
method all featured prominently in papers. SIFT (Lowe, 2004), SURF (Bay et al., 2006),
HOG (histograms of oriented gradient) (Dalal and Triggs, 2005), bags of visual words
(Sivic and Zisserman, 2003), and similar feature extractors ruled the roost.
Another group of researchers, including Yann LeCun, Geoff Hinton, Yoshua Bengio, An
drew Ng, Shun-ichi Amari, and Juergen Schmidhuber, had different plans. They believed
271
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (AlexNet)
Fig. 8.1.1
that features themselves ought to be learned. Moreover, they believed that to be reasonably
complex, the features ought to be hierarchically composed with multiple jointly learned
layers, each with learnable parameters. In the case of an image, the lowest layers might
come to detect edges, colors, and textures, by analogy with how the visual system in ani
mals processes its input. In particular, the automatic design of visual features such as those
obtained by sparse coding (Olshausen and Field, 1996) remained an open challenge until
the advent of modern CNNs. It was not until Dean et al. (2012), Le (2013) that the idea of
generating features from image data automatically gained significant traction.
The first modern CNN (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), named AlexNet after one of its inventors,
Alex Krizhevsky, is largely an evolutionary improvement over LeNet. It achieved excellent
performance in the 2012 ImageNet challenge.
Image filters learned by the first layer of AlexNet. Reproduction courtesy of Krizhevsky
et al. (2012).
Interestingly, in the lowest layers of the network, the model learned feature extractors that
resembled some traditional filters. Fig. 8.1.1 shows lower-level image descriptors. Higher
layers in the network might build upon these representations to represent larger structures,
like eyes, noses, blades of grass, and so on. Even higher layers might represent whole
objects like people, airplanes, dogs, or frisbees. Ultimately, the final hidden state learns a
compact representation of the image that summarizes its contents such that data belonging
to different categories can be easily separated.
AlexNet (2012) and its precursor LeNet (1995) share many architectural elements. This
begs the question: why did it take so long? A key difference was that, over the previous two
decades, the amount of data and the computing power available had increased significantly.
As such AlexNet was much larger: it was trained on much more data, and on much faster
GPUs compared to the CPUs available in 1995.
272
Modern Convolutional Neural Networks
Missing Ingredient: Data
Deep models with many layers require large amounts of data in order to enter the regime
where they significantly outperform traditional methods based on convex optimizations
(e.g., linear and kernel methods). However, giventhelimitedstoragecapacityofcomputers,
the relative expense of (imaging) sensors, and the comparatively tighter research budgets
in the 1990s, most research relied on tiny datasets. Numerous papers relied on the UCI
collection of datasets, many of which contained only hundreds or (a few) thousands of
images captured in low resolution and often with an artificially clean background.
In 2009, the ImageNet dataset was released (Deng et al., 2009), challenging researchers
to learn models from 1 million examples, 1000 each from 1000 distinct categories of ob
jects. The categories themselves were based on the most popular noun nodes in WordNet
(Miller, 1995). The ImageNet team used Google Image Search to prefilter large candidate
sets for each category and employed the Amazon Mechanical Turk crowdsourcing pipeline
to confirmfor eachimagewhether it belonged to the associated category. Thisscalewasun
precedented, exceeding others by over an order of magnitude (e.g., CIFAR-100 has 60,000
images). Another aspect was that the images were at relatively high resolution of 224×224
pixels, unlike the 80 million-sized TinyImages dataset (Torralba et al., 2008), consisting
of 32 × 32 pixel thumbnails. This allowed for the formation of higher-level features. The
associated competition, dubbed the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(Russakovsky et al., 2015), pushed computer vision and machine learning research for
ward, challenging researchers to identify which models performed best at a greater scale
than academics had previously considered. The largest vision datasets, such as LAION-5B
(Schuhmann et al., 2022) contain billions of images with additional metadata.
Missing Ingredient: Hardware
Deep learning models are voracious consumers of compute cycles. Training can take hun
dreds of epochs, and each iteration requires passing data through many layers of compu
tationally expensive linear algebra operations. This is one of the main reasons why in the
1990s and early 2000s, simple algorithms based on the more-efficiently optimized convex
objectives were preferred.
Graphical processing units (GPUs) proved to be a game changer in making deep learn
ing feasible. These chips had earlier been developed for accelerating graphics processing
to benefit computer games. In particular, they were optimized for high throughput 4 × 4
matrix–vector products, which are needed for many computer graphics tasks. Fortunately,
the math is strikingly similar to that required for calculating convolutional layers. Around
that time, NVIDIA and ATI had begun optimizing GPUs for general computing opera
tions (Fernando, 2004), going as far as to market them as general-purpose GPUs (GPG
PUs).
To provide some intuition, consider the cores of a modern microprocessor (CPU). Each
of the cores is fairly powerful running at a high clock frequency and sporting large caches
(up to several megabytes of L3). Each core is well-suited to executing a wide range of in
structions, with branch predictors, a deep pipeline, specialized execution units, speculative
273
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (AlexNet)
127
execution, and many other bells and whistles that enable it to run a large variety of pro
grams with sophisticated control flow. This apparent strength, however, is also its Achilles
heel: general-purpose cores are very expensive to build. They excel at general-purpose
code with lots of control flow. This requires lots of chip area, not just for the actual ALU
(arithmetic logical unit) where computation happens, but also for all the aforementioned
bells and whistles, plus memory interfaces, caching logic between cores, high-speed in
terconnects, and so on. CPUs are comparatively bad at any single task when compared
with dedicated hardware. Modern laptops have 4–8 cores, and even high-end servers rarely
exceed 64 cores per socket, simply because it is not cost-effective.
By comparison, GPUs can consist of thousands of small processing elements (NIVIDA’s
latest Amperechipshaveup to6912CUDAcores),oftengroupedintolargergroups(NVIDIA
calls them warps). The details differ somewhat between NVIDIA, AMD, ARM and other
chip vendors. While each core is relatively weak, running at about 1GHz clock frequency,
it is the total number of such cores that makes GPUs orders of magnitude faster than
CPUs. For instance, NVIDIA’s recent Ampere A100 GPU offers over 300 TFLOPs per
chip for specialized 16-bit precision (BFLOAT16) matrix-matrix multiplications, and up
to 20 TFLOPs for more general-purpose floating point operations (FP32). At the same
time, floating point performance of CPUs rarely exceeds 1 TFLOPs. For instance, Ama
zon’s Graviton 3 reaches 2 TFLOPs peak performance for 16-bit precision operations, a
number similar to the GPU performance of Apple’s M1 processor.
There are many reasons why GPUs are much faster than CPUs in terms of FLOPs. First,
powerconsumption tends to growquadratically with clock frequency. Hence, forthepower
budget of a CPU core that runs four times faster (a typical number), you can use 16 GPU
cores at 1
4 the speed, whichyields 16×1
4 = 4timestheperformance. Second, GPUcoresare
much simpler (in fact, for a long time they were not even able to execute general-purpose
code), which makes them more energy efficient. For instance, (i) they tend not to support
speculative evaluation, (ii) it typically is not possible to program each processing element
individually, and (iii) the caches per core tend to be much smaller. Last, many operations
in deep learning require high memory bandwidth. Again, GPUs shine here with buses that
are at least 10 times as wide as many CPUs.
Back to 2012. A major breakthrough came when Alex Krizhevsky and Ilya Sutskever im
plemented a deep CNN that could run on GPUs. They realized that the computational bot
tlenecks in CNNs, convolutions and matrix multiplications, are all operations that could be
parallelized in hardware. Using two NVIDIA GTX 580s with 3GB of memory, either of
which was capable of 1.5 TFLOPs(still a challenge for most CPUs a decade later), they im
plemented fast convolutions. The cuda-convnet127 code was good enough that for several
years it was the industry standard and powered the first couple of years of the deep learning
boom.
8.1.2 AlexNet
AlexNet, which employed an 8-layer CNN, won the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recog
nition Challenge 2012 by a large margin (Russakovsky et al., 2013). This network showed,
274
Modern Convolutional Neural Networks
Fig. 8.1.2
for the first time, that the features obtained by learning can transcend manually-designed
features, breaking the previous paradigm in computer vision.
The architectures of AlexNet and LeNet are strikingly similar, as Fig. 8.1.2 illustrates. Note
that we provide a slightly streamlined version of AlexNet removing some of the design
quirks that were needed in 2012 to make the model fit on two small GPUs.
From LeNet (left) to AlexNet (right).
There are also significant differences between AlexNet and LeNet. First, AlexNet is much
deeper than the comparatively small LeNet-5. AlexNet consists of eight layers: five con
volutional layers, two fully connected hidden layers, and one fully connected output layer.
Second, AlexNet used the ReLU instead of the sigmoid as its activation function. Let’s
delve into the details below.
Architecture
In AlexNet’s first layer, the convolution window shape is 11 × 11. Since the images in
ImageNet are eight times taller and wider than the MNIST images, objects in ImageNet
data tend to occupy more pixels with more visual detail. Consequently, a larger convolution
window is needed to capture the object. The convolution window shape in the second
layer is reduced to 5 × 5, followed by 3 × 3. In addition, after the first, second, and fifth
convolutional layers, the network adds max-pooling layers with a window shape of 3 ×
3 and a stride of 2. Moreover, AlexNet has ten times more convolution channels than
LeNet.
After the final convolutional layer, there are two huge fully connected layers with 4096 out
puts. These layers require nearly 1GB model parameters. Because of the limited memory
275
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (AlexNet)
in early GPUs, the original AlexNet used a dual data stream design, so that each of their
two GPUs could be responsible for storing and computing only its half of the model. Fortu
nately, GPU memory is comparatively abundant now, so we rarely need to break up models
across GPUs these days (our version of the AlexNet model deviates from the original paper
in this aspect).
Activation Functions
Furthermore, AlexNet changed the sigmoid activation function to a simpler ReLU activa
tion function. On the one hand, the computation of the ReLU activation function is simpler.
For example, it does not have the exponentiation operation found in the sigmoid activation
function. On the other hand, the ReLU activation function makes model training easier
when using different parameter initialization methods. This is because, when the output
of the sigmoid activation function is very close to 0 or 1, the gradient of these regions is
almost 0, so that backpropagation cannot continue to update some of the model parameters.
By contrast, the gradient of the ReLU activation function in the positive interval is always 1
(Section 5.1.2). Therefore, if the model parameters are not properly initialized, the sigmoid
function may obtain a gradient of almost 0 in the positive interval, meaning that the model
cannot be effectively trained.
Capacity Control and Preprocessing
AlexNet controls the model complexity of the fully connected layer by dropout (Section
5.6), while LeNet only uses weight decay. To augment the data even further, the training
loop of AlexNet added a great deal of image augmentation, such as flipping, clipping, and
color changes. This makes the model more robust and the larger sample size effectively
reduces overfitting. See Buslaev et al. (2020) for an in-depth review of such preprocessing
steps.
class AlexNet(d2l.Classifier):
def __init__(self, lr=0.1, num_classes=10):
super().__init__()
self.save_hyperparameters()
self.net = nn.Sequential(
nn.LazyConv2d(96, kernel_size=11, stride=4, padding=1),
nn.ReLU(), nn.MaxPool2d(kernel_size=3, stride=2),
nn.LazyConv2d(256, kernel_size=5, padding=2), nn.ReLU(),
nn.MaxPool2d(kernel_size=3, stride=2),
nn.LazyConv2d(384, kernel_size=3, padding=1), nn.ReLU(),
nn.LazyConv2d(384, kernel_size=3, padding=1), nn.ReLU(),
nn.LazyConv2d(256, kernel_size=3, padding=1), nn.ReLU(),
nn.MaxPool2d(kernel_size=3, stride=2), nn.Flatten(),
nn.LazyLinear(4096), nn.ReLU(), nn.Dropout(p=0.5),
nn.LazyLinear(4096), nn.ReLU(),nn.Dropout(p=0.5),
nn.LazyLinear(num_classes))
self.net.apply(d2l.init_cnn)
We construct a single-channel data example with both height and width of 224 to observe
the output shape of each layer. It matches the AlexNet architecture in Fig. 8.1.2.
276
Modern Convolutional Neural Networks
AlexNet().layer_summary((1, 1, 224, 224))
Conv2d output shape:
torch.Size([1, 96, 54, 54])
ReLU output shape: torch.Size([1, 96, 54, 54])
MaxPool2d output shape:
torch.Size([1, 96, 26, 26])
Conv2d output shape:
torch.Size([1, 256, 26, 26])
ReLU output shape: torch.Size([1, 256, 26, 26])
MaxPool2d output shape:
torch.Size([1, 256, 12, 12])
Conv2d output shape:
torch.Size([1, 384, 12, 12])
ReLU output shape: torch.Size([1, 384, 12, 12])
Conv2d output shape:
torch.Size([1, 384, 12, 12])
ReLU output shape: torch.Size([1, 384, 12, 12])
Conv2d output shape:
torch.Size([1, 256, 12, 12])
ReLU output shape: torch.Size([1, 256, 12, 12])
MaxPool2d output shape:
Flatten output shape:
Linear output shape:
Linear output shape:
torch.Size([1, 256, 5, 5])
torch.Size([1, 6400])
torch.Size([1, 4096])
ReLU output shape: torch.Size([1, 4096])
Dropout output shape:
torch.Size([1, 4096])
torch.Size([1, 4096])
ReLU output shape: torch.Size([1, 4096])
Dropout output shape:
torch.Size([1, 4096])
Linear output shape:
torch.Size([1, 10])
8.1.3 Training
Although AlexNet was trained on ImageNet in Krizhevsky et al. (2012), we use Fashion
MNIST here since training an ImageNet model to convergence could take hours or days
even on a modern GPU. One of the problems with applying AlexNet directly on Fashion
MNIST is that its images have lower resolution (28×28 pixels) than ImageNet images. To
make things work, weupsamplethemto224×224. Thisisgenerallynotasmartpractice, as
it simply increases the computational complexity without adding information. Nonetheless,
we do it here to be faithful to the AlexNet architecture. We perform this resizing with the
resize argument in the d2l.FashionMNIST constructor.
Now, we can start training AlexNet. Compared to LeNet in Section 7.6, the main change
here is the use of a smaller learning rate and much slower training due to the deeper and
wider network, the higher image resolution, and the more costly convolutions.
model = AlexNet(lr=0.01)
data = d2l.FashionMNIST(batch_size=128, resize=(224, 224))
trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10, num_gpus=1)
trainer.fit(model, data)
8.1.4 Discussion
AlexNet’s structure bears a striking resemblance to LeNet, with a number of critical im
provements, both for accuracy (dropout) and for ease of training (ReLU). What is equally
striking is the amount of progress that has been made in terms of deep learning tooling.
277
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (AlexNet)
What was several months of work in 2012 can now be accomplished in a dozen lines of
code using any modern framework.
Reviewing the architecture, we see that AlexNet has an Achilles heel when it comes to effi
ciency: the last two hidden layers require matrices of size 6400×4096 and 4096×4096, re
spectively. This corresponds to 164 MB of memory and 81 MFLOPs of computation, both
of which are a nontrivial outlay, especially on smaller devices, such as mobile phones. This
is one of the reasons why AlexNet has been surpassed by much more effective architectures
that we will cover in the following sections. Nonetheless, it is a key step from shallow to
deep networks that are used nowadays. Note that even though the number of parameters
exceeds by far the amount of training data in our experiments (the last two layers have more
than 40 million parameters, trained on a datasets of 60 thousand images), there is hardly
any overfitting: training and validation loss are virtually identical throughout training. This
is due to the improved regularization, such as dropout, inherent in modern deep network
designs.
Although it seems that there are only a few more lines in AlexNet’s implementation than
in LeNet’s, it took the academic community many years to embrace this conceptual change
and take advantage of its excellent experimental results. This was also due to the lack of
efficient computational tools. At the time neither DistBelief (Dean et al., 2012) nor Caffe
(Jia et al., 2014) existed, and Theano (Bergstra et al., 2010) still lacked many distinguishing
features. It wastheavailability ofTensorFlow(Abadietal., 2016)thatdramaticallychanged
the situation.
8.1.5 Exercises
1. Following uponthediscussion above, analyze the computational properties of AlexNet.
1. Compute the memory footprint for convolutions and fully connected layers, respec
tively. Which one dominates?
2. Calculate the computational cost for the convolutions and the fully connected layers.
3. Howdoesthememory(readandwrite bandwidth, latency, size) affect computation?
Is there any difference in its effects for training and inference?
2. You are a chip designer and need to trade off computation and memory bandwidth.
For example, a faster chip requires more power and possibly a larger chip area. More
278
Modern Convolutional Neural Networks
128
memory bandwidth requires more pins and control logic, thus also more area. How do
you optimize?
3. Whydoengineers no longer report performance benchmarks on AlexNet?
4. Try increasing the number of epochs when training AlexNet. Compared with LeNet,
how do the results differ? Why?
5. AlexNet may be too complex for the Fashion-MNIST dataset, in particular due to the
low resolution of the initial images.
1. Try simplifying the model to make the training faster, while ensuring that the accu
racy does not drop significantly.
2. Design a better model that works directly on 28 × 28 images.
6. Modify the batch size, and observe the changes in throughput (images/s), accuracy, and
GPU memory.
7. Apply dropout and ReLUto LeNet-5. Does it improve? Can you improve things further
by preprocessing to take advantage of the invariances inherent in the images?
8. CanyoumakeAlexNetoverfit? Whichfeaturedoyouneedtoremoveorchangetobreak
training?
Discussions128